Perspective Registered U.S. Patent A Matter of Loyalty by Raymond os ANGELES—In his Chicago accept- LE ance speech Adlai Stevenson said: “The truth is that President Eisenhower, cynically coveted as a candidate but ignored as a leader, is largely indebted to Democrats in Congress for what accomplishments he can claim.” The truth is in direct contradiction to this grave charge of disloyalty to the President against the Republican Party in Congress. Indeed, the candidate own charge by asserting, in the loose, fancy-free rhetoric which belies his in sixteen repetitions of the word “leadership,” that the President is no leader. We are therefore invited to believe that the Democrats in Congress have been following a ghostly nimbus. Also, Stevenson implies that he approves of the President's program. But self-contradictions are common is the pleasant adornment of capri- cious, disorderly. thinking. Let us ap- peal to the facts. The candidate made this charge of disloyalty on July 14, citing as au- thority the Congressional Quarterly. I challenged that private information service in this space under date of July 16, and my piece has been in- serted in the Congressional Record with corroborative materials from Sen- ators Schoeppel, Margaret Chase Smith, and others. Moley ROLL-CALL ANALYSIS The respective chairmen of the Re- publican Senate and Congressional Campaign Committees have inserted in the Congressional Record of Aug. 17 and Aug. 20 a complete analysis of all roll calls in both the 83rd and 84th Congresses. This represents a monumental job of research which can be checked and audited for accuracy. This analysis shows that after elim- inating from the total roll calls in the two Congresses items which were merely procedural and organizational and also others which were not in the President’s program, there were 675 with which we are evaluating Republican concerned in loyalty to the President. a On these, majority of Republicans in both houses in both Congresses opposed the President in 10 per cent of the cases. A majority of Democrats opposed the President in 47 per cent of those cases. Office The analysis also shows that in all Eisenhower issues in both houses, the Republicans supplied 59 per cent of all votes cast for the program, and the Democrats 41 per cent of those votes. — Putting it another way, the record shows that the Democrats supplied 71 per cent of all opposition votes and the Republicans only 29 per cent. There were 345 House and Senate roll calls—or 51 per cent of the 675 Eisenhower roll calls—on which a ma- jority of both parties were not united behind President Eisenhower's pro- gram. These include the 10 per cent of the roll calls in which a majority of Republicans were opposed to the President’s program. Yet even after in- cluding those, the Republicans sup- plied 75 per cent of all the favorable votes on those 345 roll calls, and the Democrats only 25 per cent. Of the opposition votes, the Democrats sup- plied 75 per cent, and the Republi- cans, 25 per cent. NATURE OF ISSUES Moreover, in the detailed informa- tion offered in the study concerning the nature of the issues in which some Democratic votes were necessary to win for the President, a _ very considerable proportion involved the - Eisenhower-Benson agricultural poli- cies and a conflicting farm program of the Democrats. Others had to do with spending items in which the President had the support of economy-minded Democrats. It comes with poor grace for the candidate of a party dedi-— cated to overturning the Eisenhower- Benson farm program and to more spending to claim credit for these. An examination of those roll calls in which a majority of Republicans supported and a majority of Demo- crats opposed the President shows that the President won in 75 per cent of the cases in the Republican 83rd Congress and in only 41 per cent of the cases in the Democratic 84th Con- gress. That forcefully illustrates why the President is asking for a Republi- can Congress. }/ aT This record of loyalty is certainly ° bright in contrast with the troubled relations between the President and his party in Congress in the second: Roosevelt term and in 81st and’ 82nd: Congresses in Truman’s years. Newsweek, September . 10, 1956 “i
