erspective Registered , U.S. Patent Office A New Kind of Campaign by Raymond Moley AMPAIGN orators are already filling the air with platitudes about the “new frontier” and the “challenge of the future” and all that sort of thing. But they must realize, especially those who are campaigning for the national tickets, that so far as campaigning goes, the future is already here. The maelstrom of world events in which we find ourselves and the actual phys- ical business of campaigning distin- guish this top-level debate from all others in the past. After visiting a considerable num- ber of states from coast to coast, and changes the air train, rest, Reasonable that ever was days. collect timate bruised mon after examining the communications I have received from those reporters who have visited other states, it is my conclusion that upheavals and flaring conflicts in Asia, Africa, and Latin America are haunting American minds far more than the fate of the farmer, the family budget of the worker, con- cern about possible catastrophic ill- ness, or housing or school classrooms. These latter are important matters, but when there is the possible col- lapse of the U.N. and maybe a spread of war which would engulf millions and cast death over the land for ci- vilians as well as the military, there is priority among apprehensions. PARTY LINES IGNORED: More Americans than some of us realize would phrase their feelings like this: “Let’s let the home affairs be cared for by congressmen and sen- ators and governors. The President is the one in whose judgment will rest the awful decisions which may mean peace or war, annihilation or secu- raincoat. and port to lem speeches, shakes. of mental ical human may words deep rity.” Thus there is developing a dif- ferentiation in the estimates of voters between district and state candidates and the two individuals who are run- ning for President. I could name spe- cifically half a dozen states in which it is more than likely that the majority will go to one party in the state elec- tion and to the national candidates of the other party. Voters are likely to ignore party lines in evaluating the names on the national tickets. Moreover, the sheer physical de- mands upon national candidates this year transcend anything candidates have known and felt in the past. Radio sues and television, as has been said over for and over, have This made revolutionary the And with interest, slighted. lected. or comprehension He for character, pacity of issues I afternoon of scheduled wait. Stevenson campaigning West slight in campaigning methods. But candidates’ habit of traveling by has a still greater impact. When a candidate traveled by there were periods of quiet, and reflection between cities, a seclusion from the pests pounce upon a candidate when- he makes a public appearance possible for nights and parts of He was afforded a chance to his thoughts, talk with his in- advisers, and rest his poor right hand, that bit of com- property with no holds barred. | BATTERED He was jammed into a seat we took off. At La Guardia Air- there was a handful of politicians grab him and whisk him to Har- for many appearances, short and thousands of hand- Imagine weeks and months days like that. It is beyond the and almost beyond the phys- and emotional capacity of one being. In such a campaign, a candidate rely, sometimes unwisely, upon written by others. If he lacks personal knowledge of the is- congressmen, is why this campaign is unique. conditions, he must utter same routine again and again. now, when there are 50 states a thousand local problems, no however small, may be No pressure group neg- No hand unshaken. No local state VIP overlooked. In the confusion the voter loses all of the detailed issues. will reach out for the man, feel his mental muscle, his essential judge his strength and ca- to bear the massive burdens the Presidency. The rest of the he will regard as_ chores senators, governors. their « the ce CANDIDATE One of the most poignant scenes have ever witnessed was on a late in Pittsburgh in the autumn 1956. I was seated in a plane for New York. There was a The word was that candidate was due. He had been all day, I believe, in Virginia. He appeared, a worn, figure, garbed in a battered and Famec Newsweek, September 26. 1960 White o’ Scc occas: avail in De
