lationist,” however, House lowest opposition leaders Office Willkie Rep. isolationist was was of the war effort and is liked trusted by most Republican leaders. Will the country be more conserva- Yes, well on into the postwar The men thrown into the lime- are, in the main, middle-of-the- steady people. A lot of extremists coattail riders went down. This is not a flash in the pan. It a change in the national temper some time to come. What about Jim Farley’s future? An of the vote in the various shows that the defeat of his in New York can be ascribed to upturn against the Adminis- Throughout the nation, Farley continue to be respected and sup- by conservative Democrats, and may possibly see them seriously for the control of the party. Will the war effort be more vigorous prosecuted? Yes. The tonic effect of election will put zest into the in Congress, into industrial generally, and into the small and agricultural areas. Labor also and publicans, the of James whom league, office election Congress winning himself. the over. an. feuding ing,” Christian does the party, alike burden onstrate, Herald will be less confident of their The desire to win the war will, Public morale will be better be- the people have taken over the of morale-building themselves. its the wholeheartedly tions to they tory where. Is this all due to protest against the effort of the Administration? No. in part. It is the continuation of undercurrent that began in some sections of the Middle West as as 1936. It has grown in every since, until, as a result of this . Republican governors will hold in states with approximately three- of the population of the nation minority as have greatly increased representa- in Congress. This tide is not likely recede for a considerable time and it well go much farther. full the as play ties halted.” mand W. What about straw votes? Polls may useful in pointing out trends. But more accurate pre-election polls the by the less value they have as because voters are influenced Mayor cratic man them. The best commentators still it necessary to travel, to talk with reelect Albert Nash the Raymond observers on the spot and consider generally how current hap- are likely to affect voters. Poli- is still an art, not a science. & appeared NEWSWEEK and both were reelected. Fish, goes to his thirteenth term in the by the scant margin of 4,062 votes, of his career. He won despite the of President- Roosevelt and of his own party—Wendell L. and Gov.-elect Thomas E. Dewey. Clare E. Hoffman, an outstanding before Dec. 7, whose defeat earnestly desired by the New Deal, reelected in Michigan. But pre-Pearl Harbor interventionists fared well—Gov. Harold E. Stassen Sen. Joseph H. Ball, Minnesota Re- who were attacked bitterly in primary campaigns for their support Mr. Roosevelt before Dec. 7, and Sen. E. Murray, Montana Democrat, Sen. Burton K. Wheeler, his col- had accused of “trying to ride into on the coattails of war fever.” President Roosevelt’s comment on the was brief: he assumed the new would be as much in favor of the war as the Chief Executive He was expressing only part of consensus of commentators the country The mandate, it was agreed, was for end to inefficiency and bureaucratic in Washington. “It will be surpris- wrote Roscoe Drummond in The Science Monitor, “if the election not have a emaabeneng effect upon Administration.” As for its effect upon the Republican } commentators and GOP leaders © called upon the party to realize the of victory: let the party now dem- said the Republican New York Tribune, “that it has learned by blunders, and possesses the ability and bravery to support the war effort and to place in key posi- men sufficiently wise and farseeing take command in a national crisis. If do not give this proof . . . their vic- will be an empty success leading no- If they live up to their opportuni- leader. Announcing his retirement GOP National Chairman to give his time to Congressional duties, he said Republicans would “devote themselves Americans to winning the war and not politics.” their to power cannot be The attitude of the Republican com- was set forth soberly by Rep. Joseph Martin Jr. of Massachusetts, House There were three outstanding defeats in elections aside from the beatings taken candidates. The powerful machine of Frank Hague of Jersey City, Demo- boss of New Jersey and a vice chair- of the National Committee, failed to Sen. William H. Smathers over W. Hawkes, Republican. The Kelly- machine of Chicago was trounced by victory of Senator Brooks over Rep. S. McKeough. And Democrats march likely to quarrel through 1944
showrooms, you must wait until victory enjoy this superlative instrument. end by buying War Bonds! needs But you can prepare for the war's earlier your investment, Your country and you will building soundly for the future, when may want to purchase a home, a car, television set, or a Capehart. Your Capehart dealer also offers counsel on other musical requirements the selection of a piano, an organ, instruments, sheet music, recordings. Capehart Division of the Farnsworth vision & Radio Corporation, Ft. Wayne, - FARNSWORTH REPRODUCTION —™TELEVISION to be you a you . . . band The Tele- Ind. “The Engulfed Cathedral,” by Claude Debussy, painted for the Capehart Col- lection by Raymond Breinin. This im- pressionistic tone-poem tells the ancient Breton legend of the cathedral that rises from the sea. © Reprints of previous paintings are now available from your Capehart dealer at a modest charge. Or write to Capehart. © Capehart Early Georgian (illustrated below) with the time-proved record changer that turns the records over. Equipped for FM radio,
