Perspective The a a to a N THE midst of all the hand-on- heart declarations of politicians concerning the Negroes who are pre- vented from voting and the boasts that the right to vote has been ex- tended by Federal law to enfranchise those people, to my knowledge noth- ing has been said or done by either party for 8 million voters who were unable to vote on Nov. 8. These are American citizens who have moved from state to state. This number would be enough to swing the Presi- dential balance in a number of states in a close election. In NEWSWEEK’s own organization I know a consider- able number of executive, sales, and editorial personnel who lost their 1960 votes because of being shifted from state to state. As we turn to much larger business enterprises, the numbers run very high. Great corporations engaged in man- ufacturing or oil production and dis- tribution or chain stores must of necessity shift managers, salesmen, and other executives constantly. Each such shift made within a year dis- franchises in must cases at least two votes and in some cases more. There is no rational reason why these people should not be permitted to vote for President and Vice President. The bar to voting in 35 of the states is the requirement of one year’s resi- dence for eligibility. Three states re- quire two years. Others require six months. Perhaps reasons may be of- fered why relative strangers in a com- munity or state should not participate in electing state and local officials, since their familiarity with local con- ditions may be inadequate to justify a voice in such choices. But that does not apply to the election of the Presi- dent and Vice President, who are na- tionally known and who must serve all the people in all the 50 states. CORRECTION BY LAW This injustice could, of course, be corrected by legislation in the states. According to the American Heritage it! Foundation, a nonpartisan organiza- tion which has done a splendid job in getting out the vote for several years, three states have made such changes in their voting requirements. Cali- fornia has fixed the residence re- quirement at 54 days; Missouri at Disfranchised by Raymond 60 should not apply to voting for mem- bers of the Senate and House of Rep- resentatives, because under our system these are selected not only to make laws to apply to all, but to rep- resent in Congress the interests of their states. Moley days, and Ohio at 40 days But such changes in state laws take a long time. Voting qualifications are embedded in many state constitutions, It seems to me that Federal legisla. tion might be held constitutional which would permit every qualified American citizen to cast a vote fo President and Vice President where he has lived for 30 days. I have not studied the cases on this, but I invite lawyers and election officials who may read this to write and give me their opinions. Perhaps such liberalization TWO-DAY ELECTIONS According to the American Herit- age Foundation’s statement, three other groups were disfranchised for no substantial reason. There were 7.6 million who were business travelers or sick and hospitalized who lost their votes because of the variations of re- quirements among the states for =) sentee ballots. There are also the 600,000 disfranchised in the District of Columbia. Barring the latter rests upon reasons which have long since lost any rational meaning. Eight hundred thousand illiterates are barred, which is proper despite the radical proposal of the Demoesatil platform to abolish all literacy tests. | There are millions more who areh barred because of moving about within states and who do not under- stand the complicated process of new registration. Changes of registration take time and knowledge. Another suggestion would be to provide two days for elections. This is allowed in some European countries. When we are selecting people to serve us for two or four years, two days for voting would not be too long for making the momentous choices. The low percentage of voting among those who are eligible has been and remains a blot on our national con-: science, but that low percentage could be raised by a_reconsidera- tion and simplification of our absur and obsolete electoral system. Newsweek, November 21, 196 “|
