Perspective Registered Two Views of by RAYMOND HEN two such authentic leaders Was James B. Conant and Dwight D. Eisenhower publish essentially the same message, Americans may well note and consider its implications. The Harvard president’s major concern is “Education in a Divided World.” Eisenhower’s is the chronicle of a great war. But in both cases the for- ward look is to a divided world, Amer- ica’s place in it, and the need for intellectual and economic as well as military preparedness. Without discounting the danger of unpremeditated war, both men reject out of hand the notion of a “pre- ventive” war, which would not prevent but would pre- cipitate chaos. Both appraise the leaders of the Kremlin as essentially different from the Nazi apostles of military aggression. Eisenhower, by implication, and Conant, more positively, doubt that war will come in the foreseeable future —barring an accident. The Marxist, Conant points out, believes the next war must be civil war. Meanwhile, there will continue that icy status of mutual fear, dislike, and subtle pressure described in Commu- nist terms as “no peace, no war.” There will be little relief in this strained relationship, for the devout Communist believes destiny is his. Russian power must not be mistaken for a mere revival of nineteenth-cen- tury nationalism or pan-Slavism; it is, rather, a thoroughly indoctrinated pop- ulation burning with an ideological zeal which only efficient mass educa- tion can achieve after three decades of unremitting discipline. oTH Conant and Eisenhower agree B on armed strength as a warning to those Communists whose respect extended only to power, although the scientist differs somewhat from the general in the exact nature of military preparedness. It should be noted that these presi- dents of great universities both stress— Conant in his book and Eisenhower in his Columbia University inaugural address—the vast importance of in- cluding the study of the Russian economic, political, and social system in our educational programs. U.S. Patent Office a Divided World The hope of Conant, the scientist. is in change and the irresistible pressure of facts. If the Marxist thesis of the dire fate of non-Communist countries ideology may be torn apart from with- in. Hope for this, incidental- ly, has already appeared in the apostasy of Russian leaders like Varga, who was punished for saying that America was not likely to col- lapse so soon as the Proph- et had ordered. This possible victory, both MOLEY is can be frustrated—if a depression can be avoided here and if living stand- ards can continue to rise with greatey and greater equality of opportunity— the massive structure writers of Communist declare, can come only as we maintain the stability, productivity, and promise of our own civilization. “Physi- cal means and skillful organization,” says Eisenhower, “may see [democ- racy] safely through a crisis, but only if basically the democracy of our day satisfies the mental, moral, and physi- cal wants of the masses living under it can it continue to exist.” On this point, Conant presents his six goals of our system: “(1) The con- tinuation of a form of government based on free elections and free ex- pression of opinion. (2) A continua- tion of the many relatively independ- ent government units, towns, cities, states, and the Federal government— a flexible though complex system which allows for the maximum of ‘home rule.’ (3) A much greater de- gree of honesty and efficiency in all these governmental units. (4) The continuation of our highly competitive economic system with its wide diver- gency of pecuniary rewards. (5) A greater degree of mobility and fluidity and a lesser degree of social distinc- tion between occupational groups. (6) A greater degree of equality of oppor- tunity for the youth of each succeed- ing generation.” uR job is most difficult because it QO is in essence a compromise. It seeks equality of opportunity through the wise use of government, while it must avoid the stifling of initiative through too much government. That compromise at home must be the basis of permanence in a divided world. —— Newsweek, December 6, 19%
