Perspective Registered Henry Gets by Raymond ENRY was planting some gera- H niums. It was a way of usefully employing his body while his mind was reaching a decision. Later there would be two hours before bedtime. At supper he had said he might go over and: discuss with a neighbor the behavior of another neighbor’s chick- ens. There was also a report for the office he had to work on. There was also a good Western at 8:30. His wife suggested the planting while he was -making up his mind. The gate opened and a brisk young man came in. He showed Henry a card saying he was John Pollsum of the Goofy Research Institute. He said: “We are conducting a Presidential opinion poll and would like to have your cooperation.” Henry nodded his head reflectively. Pollsum whipped out a aailaall, saying: “First I would like to have “Mr. one and commit Pollsum card. preferences?” Henry, against Stevenson against Nixon. ning little Pollsum in his “good-by” gate Henry entered the Western. MORAL your economic status, your social class Henry as it were.” Henry didn’t understand. “Your standing in society, in the economic order.” “I guess all right. I don’t make any enemies.” After noting something in the book, Pollsum went on: “What is your party affiliation? Democratic, Repub- lican, or independent?” “Is there an independent party? Who’s running on that?” “J don’t mean that. I mean you, for example.” “Oh! I don’t want to run for any- thing. They wouldn't like it at the office. All that notoriety.” “I mean your preference.” “How on earth can I prefer it if it isn’t a party?” “What party do you generally sup- port at the polls?” - “I don’t vote generally. Something’s always coming up. And I never really kept track.” “Have you at any time voted Democratic?” “I voted for Roosevelt once. I guess he was running against a fel- low named London.” “Did you vote for Eisenhower?” “Once. But he wasn’t in a party. He was like Washington or Lincoln.” “Tl put you down as an independ- ent.” Noting in book. “I wouldn't want that to get out in the office.” Henry looked worried. other, are in is independent tion, what They their social unsound of hidden They consider ask work America But cal writers that and is to promises Democratic-union tion. ers, granted few.” that greater Few Henry lose Democratic-union nore hopelessly Henry the future cp ~ aeial U.S. Patent Office Polled Moley Banks says our motto is all for one for all. I don’t want to myself.” handed Henry a _ larger “Will you please mark your reading aloud: “Kennedy Nixon. Johnson against Nixon. against Nixon. Humphrey Nixon. Symington against Why are all these fellows run- against one man? Isn't that a unfair?” noted after “independent” book: “Don’t know.” He said and moved toward the and across the street. looked at his watch, slowly the house, and turned on OF THE STORY isn’t very sharp, but he and smarter Henrys who fail to vote the tens of millions. But none by intellectual convic- nor independent government of interest in is doing to him. have their homes, their savings, insurance, and their equity in security. They suffer from an dollar. They pay hundreds taxes on what they buy. pay and they pray. They don’t themselves a problem. They no pity: or pious sentiment. They aR Ce and save and invest, and keep productive and strong. pollsters and professional politi- tell Republican candidates the Henrys are “independents” that the way to get them to vote identify Republicanism with the and policies of the liberal labor-ADA coali- Thus they would forsake all oth- taking loyal party members for and ending in “we happy NS i ERTS eA ERO i 2S eS lle ppicinn ae But 1940, 1944, and 1948 prove the greater the identification, the will be the abstention. Republican workers call on and explain what he has to from profligate government. And labor workers ig- him because they consider him bourgeois. is forgotten. But he holds key to a creative, conservative for all of us. Newsweek, May 9, 1960 |—
