**Perspective**

*Youth in Bifocals*
by RAYMOND MOLEY

In a wise and amusing speech, Her-
bert Hoover recently warned a col-
lege graduating class against the se-
ductive promises of our exponents of
security. He said some of these people
tell us that "life is still a race, but that
everybody must come out even at
the end."

Mr. Hoover's point is exceedingly
timely at this commencement season,
since it is beginning to
appear that our educational
institutions are turning out
young people who are more
concerned with security than
with success and who in
their early 20s are deeply
interested in the prospect of
an old-age pension. Perhaps
the great majority of the
congressmen who voted pell-
mell for the Rankin pension
bill were quite aware of this new ver-
sion of our youth's spirit of adventure.
To some of us, it might seem that
passing a pension bill for people who
will not get it for 30 or 40 years was a
bit premature. But apparently those
politicians had their ears close to the
slow heartbeat of youth.

In a Fortune article it is reported
that our 1949 college graduate seems
to be obsessed with a yearning for
security. He wants a good safe job,
preferably with a big, safe corporation;
a wife-and quick; a couple of chil-
dren, and a nice, soft, average life. He
is not much interested in a lot of
money, and a zest for a competitive
career is absent.

FOOTNOTE on this survey notes two
exceptions to this mood. Texas
and Oklahoma graduates are more
daring. They want to go into business
for themselves. No doubt this survival
of self-reliance reflects the spirit of
two states which are happily proving
that there is a frontier where adventure
still wins rewards. But over the gen-
erality of the nation's youth the doc-
trine of safety first seems to have laid
its spell.

Our government, now apparently
dedicated to the proposition that all
men ought to be kept equal, has pub-
lished a pamphlet about employment
opportunities. It tells graduates how
to find a profession or line of work
that is not crowded. The idea con-
veyed seems to be that the way to
serve youth is to tell them to go where
there is the least competition. There
was a time when a young man who
wanted to go into a crowded profes-
sion was told that "there is always
room at the top." Our securicrats
would now deem such advice "anti-
social."

These graduates are the victims of
many trends during the formative years
-the total impact of which
is not only to lessen the
prospects of individual ef-
fort, but to condition their
minds to a life sustained by
adventitious props. Security
through the state has been
the theme of political dis-
course. A great leveling has
been the objective of legisla-
tion. Taxation has almost
extinguished the opportu-
nity for new small enterprise. But
directly bearing upon these college
graduates has been a trend in the
content of the courses they have taken.
I cannot claim that the following
criticisms apply to all courses and sub-
jects, but the application is sufficiently
large to merit attention. In history,
"social" narratives portray those who
built railroads and industrial enter-
prises as thieves and blackguards.
Sociology has been redolent with plans
for state-supported cradle-to-grave
security. Economics has been licking
the business cycle and stultifying man-
agement. Psychology has provided a
Freudian vocabulary for older con-
cepts of right and wrong. Notable, too,
are the burgeoning courses that teach
women how to be contented house-
wives and men to be beslippered
burghers-courses that train people to
emulate the average of their elders.

THERE has been crowded out of our
colleges much of the basic content
of a liberal education-of the great
classics of literature, of heroic history,
of speculative philosophy, and of the
mind-sharpening exercises of logic and
mathematics. These are deemed im-
practical because they represent the
uncommon in an intellectual inherit-
ance. But to stress the great and un-
common is to needle the imagination
and to light the fire of self-reliance.
If we have produced a young gen-
eration with enfeebled self-reliance,
we have ourselves to blame.

Newsweek, June 27, 1949


To create a `.txt` file, copy this text and paste it into a plain text editor (like Notepad on Windows or TextEdit on Mac). Save the file with a name like  `newsweek_june27_1949.txt` (or similar, reflecting the original file name).  Remember to choose "Plain Text" or a similar option when saving to avoid unwanted formatting.
