? NEWSWEEK Perspective U. S, Three Governorships by RAYMOND As we come to mid-October, two political conclusions are clear. One is a drift toward Republican candidates; the other is a prospective small vote. These two signs may or may not have something in common. My impression is that they are not related. The small vote will come from many contributing causes. First, a lot of people are in the Army and Navy. Second, a lot .more are too busy to think about politics. : An election is a sort of little war, and many vote merely to participate in a contest. Now a real war captures the spirit of contention in people. A great many people have moved because of their employment, and while a lot of these still have the technical qualifications for voting, they are in strange surroundings and the normal political pressures on them are gone. Many: thousands have moved from rural districts to cities and know little of urban registration.rules,-- These perfectly clear causes, , with, a number of additional ones, will account for a light vote. It is unnecessary to characterize it as apathy. The Republican drift is unmistakable (see Periscope Preview) . Vast numbers of people.are. dissatisfied with the con- duct of the war at home and abroad. The rubber debacle alone will lose the Administration countless votes. The President’s scolding of farmers has made no new city and labor votes but has lost him thousands in agri- cultural regions. The New Deal has led people to expect so much that they tend to blame it for every discomfort. In this off year, gubernatorial cam- ‘paigns are indicative of the trend. Within the month I have made some firsthand study in three widely sepa- rated states—New York, Kansas and California. In New York, a curious mix-up in party behavior is evident already. Bennett, who is a pretty un- inspiring candidate despite the popu- larity of his manager Farley, is stronger in upstate Republican New York than any candidate in years but weaker in the big city. As things look now, Dewey may come close to the un- precedented feat of carrying the city as a Republican. This creates an em- barrassment of sorts for both Dewey and Bennett. Dewey cannot attack the Roosevelt Administration vigorously for fear of losing the city. Bennett cannot . OCTOBER Patent Office MOLEY 1 talk much about the President for teal of losing support upstate. But Dewey | can afford to coast because, if the pol are correct, nothing short of the com. | mission of homicide or arson could lose him the election. Kansas is interesting this year. The Republicans had a spirited -primary contest. Senator Reed tried for the Republican nomination for governor on a crack-down-on-labor platform. He ran third. Aridrew Schoeppel, a clean-cut and respected lawyer. froma. small city { in Western Kahsas, won. He is opposed | 4 by William Burke, who has held various. appointive offices from Washington an q who ran and lost in 1940. It looks li an easy victory for Schoeppel. a There is real color in the Californ fight. Olson was elected in-1988 by a” most indiscriminate collection of rceg! “h —ham-and-eggers, labor, New Dealers, Sinclairites, single taxers and socialists, No one could~satisfy such a motley: following, and Olson has had a riotous” time for four years. His opponent, Earl” Warren, now Attorney General, im- 4 presses those who know him as a man’? of unique integrity and steadiness. He” was unopposed in i the Republican pri- | mary, and in the Democratic primary he ran Olson a rather close race. ~*~ 4a The sole appeal of Olson is his | devotion to the President. He made hay * when the Pregident visited California. | According to the announcement of the 4 Democratic Committee of Los Olson stuck to the distinguished visitor’ like a burr.in the mane of a lion. He was in the automobile with the Presi- | dent as they toured the plants in Los | Angeles and San Diego and visited | naval and marine establishments. They also visited an old mission. One cannot help speculating upon the meditations. of the two. as they contemplated the venerable beauty of San Juan Capis- ; trano. Surely their thoughts were far from the political campaign. Perhaps the President’s visit has saved Olson, ‘ but late reports still favor Warren. The election of Warren and Dewey | in the two big states on opposite sides | ‘of the country would be a considerable | return toward a political balance in ‘ this country, especially since there stretches between them an almost un- | cite ay olan apap ak. governors now in office.
