Perspective Is This N 1958, after Roman Catholic bish- I ops of Ohio had expressed public opposition to a right-to-work proposal in the campaign there, I wrote a piece in this space suggesting that ministers of the Gospel should stay out of poli- tics except when specific issues of faith and morals are involved. I then received a great many letters dis- agreeing with me. Most were from Protestant ministers. This left me with only the sad satisfaction that at any rate my small effort had helped to unite the Christian churches on least this one subject. Never have so many letters come in about an article until now. This time they are all in response to what I wrote in this space three weeks ago about the millions who were pre- vented from voting because of resi- dence requirements. In this instance all the letters were in accord. Some letters were from people who were themselves the victims of absurd and outworn residence requirements. Others dealt with the difficulty of get- ting and casting absentee ballots. Some were from state and local offi- cials suggesting reforms. And since had invited legal opinions about Fed- eral legislation dealing with the sub- ject, several were from lawyers. hope that this present article will bring many more. NOBLY CONCEIVED red or MESS The denial of the right to vote is subject which governors should deal with in their annual messages and which legislators should consider the new year. There can be only one conclusion from the abundant evi- dence on hand. Democracy is a nobly conceived experiment. But in its op- eration in the United States it is mess. While there are millions of peo- ple who are too careless and apathetic and selfish to care about voting, there are millions of others who want vote and cannot. It now appears not only that many have been disfranchised because clumsy laws and customs, but that indeterminate number who legiti- mately voted were not counted the final returns—enough, perhaps, have reversed the final choice of President. No doubt, thousands other “votes” were counted which Democracy? by Raymond at were not cast by anyone except op. rupt election officials. This compounds the _indictmy against our electoral system. With 4 the public money that is spent in hay enforcement, we are still apparent) unable to guarantee a completely x which take us back 90 years to th wholesale corruption of Tammany) Tweed Ring, complacency is not bk I I a in a to of an in to a of Moley curate and honest election for th Presidency of the United States. Thi casts a shadow upon the competeng and integrity of the nation. BACK TO TWEED It is all well to say, as did one san. timonious newspaper, that “there ar frauds in every election.” But wha the evidence already revealed i Cook County, IIl., shows condition coming in any American. In Texas, The Houston Chronick conducted of eleva a spot check counties and found that the Texaf law had not been complied with to account for paper ballots which were’ thrown out for alleged improper marking. Since the ballots regarded aj invalid were not properly kept fof canvassing by higher authorities, 10 one will ever know how many voted for whom and whether valid vote were counted. There were maf thousands of discrepancies, perhaps 150,000, between the numbers d votes cast and the numbers credited to the candidates in the retump There may have been enough to have changed the result in the state. Ff A first responsibility rests upon thef states. They should modernize thei election laws and, so far as possible make them uniform over the nation} Action toward that end could come§ from governors...conferences and th associations of state secretaries of state and attorneys general. The responsibility of Congress is take steps to provide Federal inspec tion of elections of Presidents, sent Gin tors, and members of the Hous.f There have been laws and _proposiif to protect the voting rights of Negroef and to control the activities of corpot }) 7} o tions and labor organizations. Ther} err seems to be no reason why Feder) power with new legislation should no { protect the accuracy and honesty 4 voting generally. Newsweek, December 12, !
