

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 3
                 AI Ethics Council Founded by Open AI and Operation HOPE Holds Inaugural Meeting




AI Ethics Council Founded by Open AI and Operation HOPE Holds Inaugural
                                Meeting
                                                           PR Newswire
                                              July 1, 2024 Monday 11:00 AM EST



Copyright 2024 PR Newswire Association LLC All Rights Reserved

Length: 1033 words
Dateline: ATLANTA, July 1, 2024

Body


PR NewswireInitiated by Open AI CEO Sam Altman and Operation HOPE CEO John Hope Bryant, the group aims
to ensure underserved communities can participate in the evolution of AI

ATLANTA, July 1, 2024 /PRNewswire/ -- The AI Ethics Council, founded by Open AI CEO Sam Altman and
Operation HOPE CEO John Hope Bryant, held its inaugural meeting on Friday, June 28th in Atlanta. The group,
which evolved out of a listening tour that was initiated last spring at Clark Atlanta University that Mr. Altman and Mr.
Bryant conducted together, was formed to ensure that traditionally underrepresented communities would have a
voice in the evolution of AI overall— to help frame the human and ethical considerations around the technology and
participate in the economic opportunities of artificial intelligence.The council was announced in December 2023 at
the HOPE Global Forums | Annual Meeting in Atlanta.

 The AI Ethics Council is an interdisciplinary body of diverse experts designed to become a leading authority
inidentifying, advising on,and addressing ethical issues related to artificial intelligence and its impact on
underserved and historically excluded communities. In addition to Mr. Altman and Mr. Bryant, founding council
members include: George T. French, Jr., JD, PhD., President, Clark Atlanta University and Chair of Presidents,
United Negro College FundHelene D. Gayle, MD, MPH, President, Spelman CollegeBernice A. King, JD, M. Div,
CEO, The King CenterDavid A. Thomas, PhD., President, Morehouse CollegeAngela F. Williams, JD, M. Div,
President and CEO, United Way WorldwideAmbassador Andrew J. Young, Chairman, The Andrew J. Young
Foundation, former U.N. Ambassador, former Mayor of Atlanta and civil rights iconAdditional members representing
the technology and community sectors will be announced in the coming months.At the inaugural meeting, Open AI
Head of International Policy James Hairston briefed members on the current state of AI, challenges, and
opportunities. Mr. Bryant shared that he will be convening a meeting of tech leaders to advance issues important to
the council, and announcedthe Council websitewill go live July 1, 2024. "I see this website as our first stake in the
ground. Its substance will grow, expand, and deepen over time. Transparency will be a hallmark. I encourage all
citizens, here and abroad, to get informed and educated around what AI really is and isn't," said Mr. Bryant. "As a
council, we aim to focus our attention on the needle we can help move: expanding inclusive opportunity around our
shared future, for everyone, as it relates to AI."In addition to Mr. Bryant, Operation HOPE was represented by
President and CFO Brian Betts and AI Ethics Council Managing Director Eric Kaplan. Topics the Council discussed
included:The need to focus on technical capacity: How will we develop, grow, evaluate, and test the technical
capacity of the system?How to evaluate safety, reporting, and the capacity of the law to adapt?What are the
processes in place to evaluate AI?What can be done granularly to get more components of society involved?How
can we prepare for an uncertain/undetermined future with this new tech?How can AI benefit the world? What are
the dangers? How to optimize adoption? How do we encourage equitable participation in the economic and societal

                                                                                                       Page 2 of 3
               AI Ethics Council Founded by Open AI and Operation HOPE Holds Inaugural Meeting

benefits?The AI Ethics Council will form a committee framework, with sub-committees and working groups, through
which members will help guide ethical principles for AI. The Council will be initially focused on the intersection of
technology and humanity for positive, ethical, and transformative impact generally in economic opportunity for all,
finance, education, policy, employment, accessibility, health and healthcare, and sustainability.The AI Ethics
Council will undertake a staged approach to the mission, pursuing impact by leveraging enhanced public visibility
and influence, deep tech sector expertise, policy-focused advocacy, partnerships, program development, and active
engagement with tech, business, community, government, and other stakeholders. Intended outcomes
include:Establishment of Council and Committees consisting of multidisciplinary experts dedicated to advancing AI
ethics, and positive future vision for our world.Development and dissemination of AI ethics guidelines and best
practices.Engagement of education leaders, community leaders, business leaders and entrepreneurs, government,
technologists-for-good, and the public, to foster informed discussions and decisions on AI ethics.Promotion of
ethical AI usage through education and engagement.Empowerment, inclusion, economic opportunity, and acting
where appropriate and where the Council can add value.An update on the Council's first-year activities will be
shared at the2024 HOPE Global Forums | Annual Meeting, December 9-11in Atlanta.About Operation HOPESince
1992, Operation HOPE has been moving America from civil rights to "silver rights" with the mission of making free
enterprise and capitalism work for the underserved—disrupting poverty for millions of low and moderate-income
youth and adults across the nation. Through its community uplift model, HOPE Inside, which received the 2016
Innovator of the Year recognition by American Banker magazine, Operation HOPE has served more than 4 million
individuals and directed more than $3.2 billion in economic activity into disenfranchised communities—turning
check-cashing customers into banking customers, renters into homeowners, small business dreamers into small
business owners, minimum wage workers into living wage consumers, and uncertain disaster victims into
financially empowered disaster survivors. For more information: OperationHOPE.org. Follow the HOPE
conversation on Twitter, Facebook, Instagram or LinkedIn.

Additional information may be found atwww.operationhope.orgContact InformationOperation HOPE
Kevin Boucher, 213-479-7833
kevin.boucher@operationhope.orgLalohni Campbell, 404-593-7145

la@persemediagroup.com         View original content to download multimedia:https://www.prnewswire.com/news-
releases/ai-ethics-council-founded-by-open-ai-and-operation-hope-holds-inaugural-meeting-
302187021.htmlSOURCE Operation HOPE, Inc.

Classification
Language: ENGLISH


Publication-Type: Newswire


Subject: ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ETHICS (92%); ETHICS (92%); PRESS RELEASES (91%); ARTIFICIAL
INTELLIGENCE (90%); EXECUTIVES (90%); HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY
(74%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (73%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (65%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(64%); CIVIL RIGHTS (63%); OPERATIONHOPE-meet (%); NPT Not-for-Profits (%); PER Personnel
Announcements (%)


Company: Operation HOPE, Inc.


Industry: ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ETHICS (92%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (90%); HISTORICALLY
BLACK COLLEGES (90%); CPR Computer; Electronics Products (%); EDU Education (%)

                                                                                                Page 3 of 3
              AI Ethics Council Founded by Open AI and Operation HOPE Holds Inaugural Meeting


Person: SAM ALTMAN (92%)


Geographic: ATLANTA, GA, USA (94%); GEORGIA, USA (79%); Georgia


Load-Date: July 1, 2024


  
