

                                                                             Page 1 of 3
   JACOBS' DREAM: IMPROVING DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT USING VISUAL CLUES IN THE AGE OF
                                AI AND MACHINE LEARNING




     JACOBS' DREAM: IMPROVING DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT USING
        VISUAL CLUES IN THE AGE OF AI AND MACHINE LEARNING
                                                  States News Service
                                                May 14, 2024 Tuesday



Copyright 2024 States News Service

Length: 1194 words
Byline: States News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON

Body


The following information was released by the World Bank:

In late 1981, the legendary urban design expert Allan B. Jacobs was walking along a road in Tangshan, China,
visiting a new housing development when he noticed improvised, hand-made grates covering many windows and
porches. He commented to his Chinese colleague that in the United States, such grates would indicate to visitors
that the residents considered the neighborhood unsafe. When his colleague confirmed the same was true in China,
Jacobs realized that most professions use these types of simple visual clues as a way to understand a
neighborhood and wondered why urban planners did not follow suit.

This is how Jacobs opens his seminal book, Looking at Cities, dedicated to the art of urban observation and
detection of urban clues.1 Four decades later, Jacobs' framework remains relevant, even as the tools we use to
study and visualize cities have transformed.We no longer require a notebook and comfortable shoes to understand
an urban environment. Today, from a continent away, we can see not just whether a neighborhood has grates on its
windows, but also whether building foundations are cracking, roads are paved, and sidewalks navigable for
wheelchairs. Quite simply, with a computer and internet connection, we can bring Jacobs' approach to almost any
neighborhood anywhere in the world.

Recent technological advancements enable us to efficiently review images, identify urban clues, and reveal spatial
patterns across an entire neighborhood or city. By applying machine learning algorithms to high-resolution imagery
taken above the city (aerial imagery) and at ground level (street view imagery), we can make comprehensive, multi-
view urban observations from the sky and street. The resulting georeferenced datasets and accompanying
visualizations hold enormous potential to help create resilient, healthy communities. That includes unprecedented
opportunities for spatial planning, disaster and climate risk management and reduction.

Using this data, planners and engineers can analyze built components to gather clues about blocks,
neighborhoods, and cities through access to a wide-ranging overview of specific urban characteristics, such as
each unit's:

Size (area, height, and volume of building)

Use (residential, commercial, critical infrastructure, or mixed)

                                                                             Page 2 of 3
   JACOBS' DREAM: IMPROVING DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT USING VISUAL CLUES IN THE AGE OF
                                AI AND MACHINE LEARNING

Masonry (unreinforced, reinforced, or unknown)

Vintage (for example, pre-1940, 1941-1974, 1975-1999, and 2000-present. These are locally determined based on
field surveys conducted by structural engineers.)

Roof condition (good, fair, poor, under construction or vacant)

Roof material (concrete, metal, mixed, tile, other)

Wall condition (good, fair, poor)

Wall material (typically: brick or concrete block, plaster, mix/unclear/other; can include: wood polished, wood -
crude/plank, adobe, corrugated metal, stone with mud/ashlar with lime or cement, container/trailer, plant material)

Total condition (composite estimation based on roof and wall conditions)

Taken together, these unprecedented rapid, high-resolution screenings across multiple square kilometers enable
cheaper, more efficient, and more targeted pre- and post-disaster planning. While collecting a house-by-house
census can take months or require thousands of workers, high-resolution images can now be captured by a team of
four within a week, often using a single car, a drone, and a few cameras.

As outlined in a newlypublished papersupported by Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery's
(GFDRR's) Global Program for Resilient Housing,this approach enables planners to identify specific buildings at
scale that need improvements or strengthening.It holds promise for use as a proxy forsocial vulnerability,a crucial
aspect of disaster risk management. Related work can inform region-widetraffic and infrastructure management
decisionsand scan for buildings'structural vulnerabilities in earthquake-prone areas.Future developments might
pinpoint roofs that could generate solar power or identify emergency routes and shelters.

Where and how might this be applied?

This approach is suitable for almost any environment. Local officials can prioritize neighborhoods and cities with
limited, recent data describing their built environment, especially locations with natural hazards or other risks. Areas
of interest typically span 15 to 25 square kilometers, though this approach has been implemented in locations up to
80 square kilometers, making itsuitable for small island states.

An important step is to gather the street view imagery. While this is easiest to capture from a car mounted with
many cameras (e.g., Google Street View), in informal areas or places with narrow pathways, capturing these
images can require attaching a 360 camera (e.g., GoPro Fusion) to a backpack mounted on a motorcycle or carried
on foot.

Once the street view data has been collected, it can be uploaded to Mapillary, a crowdsourced platform, which blurs
faces and license plates before the imagery is publicly available. As street view coverage is not yet ubiquitous, this
provides open-source access to recent street view imagery and circumvents licensing requirements while still
protecting personal privacy.

Next, as many contemporary solutions leverage artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), or deep
learning (DL), it is crucial tofollow ethical guidelines and mitigate potential biases in training datafor a successful
project. And, of course, local experts and other users can then review the datasets and ensure that the predictions
and classifications made by the algorithms are accurate.This approach has been effective in various
countries,including Colombia, Guatemala, Indonesia, Mexico, Paraguay, Peru, Saint Lucia, and Sint Maarten.

Quite notably, in these projects, the urban imagery and machine learning results are navigable in a browser
interface. This approach makes detailed information accessible to local planners and officials with an internet
connection and login credentials to the open-source geospatial portal.2This means that users of diverse expertise
can verify the machine learning predictions with the imagery and conduct simple analyses to visualize patterns in

                                                                             Page 3 of 3
   JACOBS' DREAM: IMPROVING DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT USING VISUAL CLUES IN THE AGE OF
                                AI AND MACHINE LEARNING

the built environment. The portal can export machine learning predictions and, given their granularity, can be
combined with other data for further hazard and risk analysis.

Altogether, using classic observational principles and machine learning algorithms to evaluate buildings,
neighborhoods, and urban areas, we can now make educated and efficient inferences about vast, complex built
environments. Specific, granular information and visualizations are available to save and improve lives, protect
assets, and shield economies from increasing disaster risks.

In short, in 2024, using machine learning and imagery collected from the sky and street, we can finally make
Jacobs' vision from 1981 a reality: widespread, simple visual analysis that helps inform urban development and,
ultimately, improves people's lives.

1Jacobs A.B. (1985)Looking at Cities.Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

2The code for the open-source portal: https://github.com/GPRH/housing_portal

Classification
Language: ENGLISH


Publication-Type: Newswire


Subject: ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (90%); LAND USE PLANNING (90%); MACHINE LEARNING (90%); RISK
MANAGEMENT (90%); URBAN DEVELOPMENT (90%); ACCIDENTS & DISASTERS (89%); DISASTER RISK
REDUCTION (89%); ENGINEERING (89%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (89%); CITIES
(78%); CIVIL ENGINEERING (78%); CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (78%); GEOSPATIAL DATA (78%);
TECHNOLOGY (76%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (75%); CITY LIFE (73%)


Industry: ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (90%); LAND USE PLANNING (90%); MACHINE LEARNING (90%);
REAL ESTATE (90%); RISK MANAGEMENT (90%); ENGINEERING (89%); RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION
(89%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (89%); CIVIL ENGINEERING (78%); GEOSPATIAL DATA (78%);
CONSTRUCTION (77%); COMPUTER NETWORKS (66%); INTERNET & WWW (66%); ROOFING MATERIALS
(63%)


Geographic: CHINA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%)


Load-Date: May 15, 2024


  
