

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 4
       Department of Homeland Security Unveils Artificial Intelligence Roadmap, Announces Pilot Projects to
                       Maximize Benefits of Technology, Advance Homeland Security ....




  Department of Homeland Security Unveils Artificial Intelligence Roadmap,
   Announces Pilot Projects to Maximize Benefits of Technology, Advance
                        Homeland Security Mission
                                                     Targeted News Service
                                            March 18, 2024 Monday 8:17 PM EST



Copyright 2024 Targeted News Service LLC All Rights Reserved




Length: 1616 words
Byline: Targeted News Service
Dateline: WASHINGTON

Body


The U.S. Department of Homeland Security issued the following news release:

DHS Will Launch Three Pilot Projects to Test AI Technology to Enhance Immigration Officer Training, Help
Communities Build Resilience and Reduce Burden for Applying for Disaster Relief Grants, and Improve Efficiency
of Law Enforcement Investigations

Today, Secretary of Homeland Security Alejandro N. Mayorkas and Chief Information Officer and Chief Artificial
Intelligence Officer Eric Hysen announced the Department of Homeland Security's (DHS) first "Artificial
Intelligence Roadmap." The roadmap details DHS's 2024 plans, including to test uses of the technologies that
deliver meaningful benefits to the American public and advance homeland security, while ensuring that individuals'
privacy, civil rights, and civil liberties are protected.

As part of the roadmap, DHS announced three innovative pilot projects that will deploy AI in specific mission areas.
Homeland Security Investigations (HSI) will test AI to enhance investigative processes focused on detecting
fentanyl and increasing efficiency of investigations related to combatting child sexual exploitation. The Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) will deploy AI to help communities plan for and develop hazard mitigation
plans to build resilience and minimize risks. And, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) will
use AI to improve immigration officer training.

"The unprecedented speed and potential of AI's development and adoption presents both enormous opportunities
to advance our mission and risks we must mitigate," said Secretary of Homeland Security Alejandro N. Mayorkas.
"The DHS AI roadmap and pilots will guide our efforts this year to strengthen our national security, improve our
operations, and provide more efficient services to the American people, while upholding our commitment to protect
civil rights, civil liberties, and privacy. What we learn from the pilot projects will be beneficial in shaping how the
Department can effectively and responsibly use AI across the homeland security enterprise moving forward."

                                                                                                    Page 2 of 4
       Department of Homeland Security Unveils Artificial Intelligence Roadmap, Announces Pilot Projects to
                       Maximize Benefits of Technology, Advance Homeland Security ....

The roadmap lays out DHS's initiatives in AI, describes the potential of AI technologies across the Department, and
offers clearer visibility into the Department's approach to AI, while underscoring the Department's commitment to
responsible utilization.

The AI roadmap outlines three lines of effort DHS is using to guide its work:

Responsibly leverage AI to advance Homeland Security missions while protecting individuals' privacy, civil rights,
and civil liberties - DHS is committed to ensuring that its use of AI fully respects privacy, civil liberties, and civil
rights, is rigorously tested to avoid bias, disparate impact, privacy harms, and other risks, and that it is
understandable to the people we serve.

Promote Nationwide AI Safety and Security - Advances in AI will revolutionize the delivery of essential goods and
services upon which Americans rely. AI can create tremendous efficiencies and benefits for citizens, but it can also
present new and novel risks. To protect U.S. cyber networks and critical infrastructure, DHS will help govern the
safe and responsible development and use of AI.

Continue to lead in AI through strong cohesive partnerships - DHS will foster strong relationships with private
sector, academia, State, Local, Territorial, and Tribal governments, international partners, non-government
organizations, research institutions, and thought leaders to accelerate the development and deployment of AI
solutions tailored to the unique challenges faced by the DHS. In line with the DHS's commitment to transparency
and visibility into the Department's vision for AI and to ensuring responsible use, DHS will continue to share
information and engage with communities, advocates, and partners to demonstrate responsible AI use.

DHS's three new pilot programs will allow the Department to assess the efficacy of AI in improving its mission
capabilities. Each pilot team is partnering with privacy, cybersecurity, and civil rights and civil liberties experts
throughout their development and evaluation process. This work will inform Department-wide policies on AI
governance. DHS offices and agencies submitted dozens of proposals for consideration to the Chief AI Officer, who
selected three pilots that would best support evaluating the effectiveness of Large Language Models (LLM) and
Generative AI technology at DHS.

The new pilot programs announced today will:

Transform Security Investigative Processes, Unlock Data-Driven Insights, and Improve Mission Outcomes - HSI's
pilot project will strengthen their investigative processes by introducing a LLM-based system designed to enhance
the efficiency and accuracy of summaries investigators rely upon. The LLM-based system will leverage open-
source technologies to allow investigators to more quickly summarize and search for contextually relevant
information within investigative reports. The pilot could lead to increases in detection of fentanyl-related networks,
aid in identification of perpetrators and victims of child exploitation crimes, and surface key patterns and trends that
could further HSI's vital work.

Bolster Planning Assistance for Resilient Communities - FEMA will launch a GenAI pilot to create efficiencies for the
hazard mitigation planning process for local governments, including underserved communities. Hazard mitigation
plans are not only a foundational step that communities can take to build their resilience but can be lengthy to
produce and challenging for communities that lack resources to do so. The pilot will specifically support State,
Local, Tribal, and Territorial governments' understanding of how to craft a plan that identifies risks and mitigation
strategies as well as generate draft plan elements--from publicly-available, well-researched sources -- that
governments could customize to meet their needs. This pilot could lead to more communities having the ability to
submit grant applications for funding to become more resilient and reduce disaster risks.

Enhance Immigration Officer Training through Generative AI - United States Citizenship and Immigration Services
is developing an interactive application that uses GenAI to improve the way the agency trains immigration officer
personnel. USCIS will generate dynamic, personalized training materials that adapt to officers' specific needs and
ensure the best possible knowledge and training on a wide range of current policies and laws relevant to their jobs.

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 4
      Department of Homeland Security Unveils Artificial Intelligence Roadmap, Announces Pilot Projects to
                      Maximize Benefits of Technology, Advance Homeland Security ....

The goal is to help enhance trainees' understanding and retention of crucial information, increase the accuracy of
their decisionmaking process, and limit the need for retraining over time.

The roadmap and announcement of pilot programs are the latest in the Department's ongoing AI initiatives.

In February, Secretary Mayorkas and CIO Hysen announced the Department's first-ever hiring sprint to recruit 50
AI technology experts to help build teams that will help better leverage AI responsibly across strategic areas of the
homeland security enterprise. These include efforts to counter fentanyl, combat child sexual exploitation and abuse,
deliver immigration services, secure travel, fortify our critical infrastructure, and enhance our cybersecurity. DHS
has received a strong response to date and is in the process of reviewing. interviewing, and hiring AI technologists
to support mission-enhancing initiatives. The Department continues to accept applications on dhs.gov/AI.

Last year, DHS established the Department's first AI Task Force and named CIO Hysen its first Chief AI Officer.
Informed by the Task Force's work over the past 11 months, DHS has identified areas where AI can enhance the
effectiveness of the Department's efforts -- helping pave the way for this roadmap and these new projects. The
Task Force's focus is on DHS's entire mission space. For instance, it is working to enhance the integrity of our
supply chains and the broader trade environment by helping deploy AI to improve cargo screening, the identification
of imported goods produced with forced labor, and risk management. The Task Force is also charged with using AI
to better detect fentanyl shipments, identify and interdict the flow of precursor chemicals around the world, and
disrupt key nodes in criminal networks.

The Department's latest efforts follow President Biden's Executive Order (EO) "Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy
Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence," signed in October2023. The EO directed DHS to promote the
adoption of AI safety standards globally, protect U.S. networks and critical infrastructure, reduce the risks that AI
can be used to create weapons of mass destruction, combat AI-related intellectual property theft, and help the
United States attract and retain skilled talent, among other missions. The President has directed DHS to establish
an AI Safety and Security Advisory Board to support the responsible development of AI. This Board will bring
together preeminent industry experts from AI hardware and software companies, leading research labs, critical
infrastructure entities, and the U.S. government. This Board will issue recommendations and best practices for an
array of AI use cases to ensure AI deployments are secure and resilient.

To read the DHS AI Roadmap, visit the DHS Artificial Intelligence Roadmap webpage.

To learn more about how DHS uses AI technologies to protect the homeland, visit Artificial Intelligence at DHS.

***

Original   text   here:  https://www.dhs.gov/news/2024/03/18/department-homeland-security-unveils-artificial-
intelligence-roadmap-announces

Copyright Targeted News Services

MSTRUCK-8537213 MSTRUCK

Classification
Language: ENGLISH


Publication-Type: Newswire


Subject: NATIONAL SECURITY & FOREIGN RELATIONS (97%); NATIONAL SECURITY (95%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (93%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (92%); GOVERNMENT BODIES & OFFICES (91%);

                                                                                                   Page 4 of 4
      Department of Homeland Security Unveils Artificial Intelligence Roadmap, Announces Pilot Projects to
                      Maximize Benefits of Technology, Advance Homeland Security ....

IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP & DISPLACEMENT (91%); TECHNOLOGY (91%); ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
(90%); DISASTER & EMERGENCY AGENCIES (90%); GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS & AUTHORITIES (90%);
IMMIGRATION (90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); SAFETY,
ACCIDENTS & DISASTERS (89%); CITIZENSHIP (78%); DISASTER PLANNING (78%); ESSENTIAL
BUSINESSES & WORKERS (78%); FEDERAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS &
NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); NEGATIVE NEWS (78%); PRESS RELEASES (78%); SAFETY (78%); DISASTER
& EMERGENCY RELIEF (77%); CRITICAL INFRASTRUCTURE (73%); EXECUTIVES (73%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (73%); CRIME, LAW ENFORCEMENT & CORRECTIONS (72%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (72%); DISASTER RELIEF (72%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (72%);
CHILD ABUSE & NEGLECT (67%); OPIATES & OPIOIDS (53%)


Organization: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (99%); FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
AGENCY (82%); US CITIZENSHIP & IMMIGRATION SERVICES (73%)


Industry: ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (90%); OPIATES & OPIOIDS (53%)


Person: ALEJANDRO MAYORKAS (90%)


Geographic: UNITED STATES (98%)


Load-Date: March 19, 2024


  
