

                                                                                                      Page 1 of 3
                                                        The Birth of 'New Deal'




                                                 The Birth of 'New Deal'
                          NPR All Things Considered (NPR) All Things Considered 9:00 PM EST
                                                         July 2, 2007 Monday



Copyright 2007 National Public Radio (R) All Rights Reserved

Length: 1174 words
Anchors: MELISSA BLOCK; ROBERT SIEGEL

This is ALL THINGS CONSIDERED from NPR News. I'm Melissa Block.

ROBERT SIEGEL, host:

And I'm Robert Siegel.

Tonight, the Museum of Broadcast Communications in Chicago honors a famous political phrase that was first
coined on this date in 1932. Seventy-five years ago, the Democratic National Convention was meeting in that city. It
nominated the then-governor of New York, Franklin Delano Roosevelt. In his acceptance speech, Roosevelt
promised America a new deal.

And as independent producer John McDonough tells us, that phrase was never intended to be quite so memorable.

JOHN McDONOUGH: It was not an original or stately phrase. It had appeared without notice in the works of Henry
James and Mark Twain. And just before the 1932 Democratic convention, the new republic began a series of
articles called "A New Deal for America." In those days, it was considered unseemly to want to be president. So
navigating the intrigues of the process was something the wise candidate left for others to do on his behalf.

For Roosevelt, this was the job of two men: Louie Howe and Jim Farley, the gregarious point man who did the
legwork, the handshaking and the bargaining on the convention floor. Roosevelt listened at a polite distance from
Albany over the radio. This is what he heard after his name was placed in nomination.

Unidentified Man #1: Franklin Delano Roosevelt (Unintelligible) as the candidate of the presidency of the United
States.

McDONOUGH: But he was not the only Democrat who wanted to be president. As the nominations drowned on,
Howe listened, worked the phones, and one by one picked off Roosevelt's opponents with promises of position for
some, exile for others.

Unidentified Man #2: The honorable Harry Flood Byrd.

McDONOUGH: The price of Byrd's support was a seat in the U.S. Senate. The fact that Virginia already had two
Democratic senators was not a problem for Howe. Senator Claude Swanson would simply become secretary of the
Navy.

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 3
                                                The Birth of 'New Deal'

Mr. CLAUDE SWANSON (Former Democratic Senator, Virginia): For the needs of humanity, I give to this
convention the name of Alfred E. Smith.

McDONOUGH: Smith would bet his entire political future against Roosevelts, make no deals with Howe, and walk
away with nothing.

Unidentified Man#3: The democracy of Texas presents her more distinguished son, John F. Garner.

(Soundbite of cheering)

MCDONOUGH: Garner came to Chicago with the support of William Randolph Hearst and enough Texas and
California delegates to put Roosevelt over the top. When Howe offered Garner the vice presidency, history struck
Roosevelt on the fourth ballot. William McAdoo of California sprang the switch.

Mr. WILLIAM McADOO (Former Democratic Senator, California): I would like to see Democrats fight Republicans
and not Democrats. California, cast 44 votes for Franklin D. Roosevelt.

McDONOUGH: With that, Texas flipped and the deed was done. According to tradition, the candidate was now
obliged to wait several weeks in silence for formal notification of his nomination. It was a pretense as leisurely as it
was obsolete. Roosevelt had quietly told his inner circle that if he were nominated, things would be different. A
month before Chicago, he had asked Raymond Moley to have an acceptance speech ready by the convention.
Moley's first draft was finished by the third week in June.

Meanwhile, Louie Howe was quietly working on an acceptance draft of his own, one he refused to share with
anyone including Roosevelt. As the convention rumbled on in Chicago, Roosevelt and his speechwriter, Sam
Rosenman, polished the Moley draft in Albany. On Friday, July 1st, Rosenman scribbled out a concluding
paragraph. He may have had the current new republic story in mind when he jotted the phrase down for the first
time.

I pledge myself, he wrote, to a new deal for the American people. He saw nothing remarkable in it and penned it in
lower case. That night, Roosevelt was nominated.

Unidentified Man#4: Franklin D. Roosevelt, having received four of the two- thirds of all the delegates voting
(unintelligible) the nominee of this convention for president of the United States.

McDONOUGH: The next morning, in an extraordinary gesture, Roosevelt boarded an airplane in Albany, flew
through a barricade of thunderstorms and set down on a gravel runway in Chicago. During the nine-hour flight, his
Garner was being nominated for the vice presidency at the convention. He and Rosenman edited the Moley draft
and a secretary typed the finished copy.

But when the plane landed, Roosevelt found an awkward surprise waiting for him - Louie Howe and that 12-page
acceptance speech he had never laid eyes on. Howe was Roosevelt's oldest and most intimate advisor. He could
not disregard his advice or his feelings. During the motorcade at the convention hall, Roosevelt quietly weighed the
two drafts against his debt to Howe. By the time he reached the Chicago Stadium, he had tactfully slid the first page
of Howe's speech on top of the Moley-Rosenman draft.

President FRANKLIN D. ROOSEVELT: I regret that I am late, but I had no control over the winds of heaven.

McDONOUGH: Reading Howe's words, he told the convention why he had come to Chicago and made it symbolic
of what to expect.

Pres. ROOSEVELT: The appearance before a national convention of its nominee for president is unprecedented
and unusual. But these are unprecedented and unusual times. Let it also be symbolic that in so doing, I broke
traditions. Let it be, from now on, the task of our party to break foolish traditions.

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 3
                                               The Birth of 'New Deal'

McDONOUGH: The message was clear. Roosevelt's campaign was off and running while the Republican nominee
was still waiting to be told he had been nominated. Roosevelt paid tribute to Woodrow Wilson, then moved into his
planned text. Moley and Rosenman breathed more easily as they heard the familiar rhythms of their words emerge,
words that would mark the Democratic Party for decades to come.

Pres. ROOSEVELT: Ours must be a party of liberal thought, of planned action, of enlightened international outlook,
and of the greatest good to the greatest number of our citizens.

McDONOUGH: After 45 minutes, Roosevelt came to the final paragraph, the one Rosenman had written in Albany
the morning before. He gave it only modest emphasis, preferring to save his rhetorical thrust for the final call to
arms.

Pres. ROOSEVELT: I pledge myself to a new deal for the American people.

MCDONOUGH: He used the phrase new deal only once. But if Roosevelt missed its symbolic potential, reporters
did not. In a text of nearly forty-four hundred words, they spotted it immediately and tabbed it for stardom. The next
morning, the Chicago Tribune singled out the phrase in a headline. Other papers flagged it in their leads.
Cartoonists turned it into a label. Soon, it became shorthand for everything the party stood for. Within 10 months,
reporters started writing it in upper case. And by the end of the first 100 days a year later, the words new deal had
become the most powerful political brand of the 20th century.

For NPR News, this is John McDonough.



  
