

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 6
                                 FIGHTING WORDS; The White House memoir grows claws.




                                           FIGHTING WORDS;
                                  The White House memoir grows claws.
                                                   The New Yorker
                                                     July 14, 2003



Copyright 2003 The Conde Nast Publications, Inc.




Section: THE CRITICS; Books; Pg. 94
Length: 3781 words
Byline: WALTER ISAACSON

There are two abiding mysteries about Bill Clinton: Why do some people hate him so passionately? And why do
some people adore him so loyally? The recent memoirs by his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, and by his intense
outrider Sidney Blumenthal focus on the former issue while providing textbook studies of the latter.

Both authors were famous for propounding the theory that the Clinton scandals were the result of what Hillary
Clinton called "a vast right-wing conspiracy," dedicated to destroying the progressive agenda. In "Living History"
(Simon & Schuster; $28), she repeats the charge, conceding only that the coordinated crusade was so brazen that
it might not have qualified as a conspiracy. In "The Clinton Wars" (Farrar, Straus & Giroux; $30), Blumenthal, whose
ornate conspiracy theories earned him the nickname Grassy Knoll, launches into a game of Trivial Pursuit that is
filled with half-forgotten bit players (remember David Bossie and George Conway III?) linked to a web of rabid
Clinton-haters stretching back to Arkansas's hardscrabble racists. Together, the authors amply prove the old maxim
that even paranoids have enemies.

Although the books are scored in different keys-Clinton's generally attempts to be gauzy and warm, Blumenthal's is
edgy and cold-their underlying refrain is the same. Both repeatedly delve into what Hillary Clinton calls "the
mechanics of what was essentially a sting operation to entrap the President" and what Blumenthal declares was the
work of "fiercely partisan Republicans who had embarked on a sexual fishing expedition." Like any fishing
expedition, which indeed it was, it could be sustained only if there were a lot of fishy things below the surface, which
indeed there were. But where most memoirists adopt an air of mellowed self-examination, these authors are not in
the mood to make concessions. Instead, they go on the attack. Their aggressiveness marks an evolution, befitting
our times, in the tone and style of memoirs by people who have worked in the White House.

The venerable tradition of the White House memoir goes back to President James Madison's extraordinary young
slave Paul Jennings. Jennings's memoir, which he wrote after Daniel Webster bought his freedom, contained most
of what we have come to expect from such books, including thumbnail sketches of important players: "Mr. Robert
Smith was then Secretary of State, but as he and Mr. Madison could not agree, he was removed, and Colonel
Monroe appointed to his place. Dr. Eustis was Secretary of War-rather a rough, blustering man; Mr. Gallatin, a tip-

                                                                                                           Page 2 of 6
                             FIGHTING WORDS; The White House memoir grows claws.

top man, was Secretary of the Treasury; and Mr. Hamilton of South Carolina, a pleasant gentleman, who thought
Mr. Madison could do nothing wrong, and who always concurred in every thing he said, was Secretary of the Navy."

Jennings also provided accounts of the policy battles over the War of 1812 ("Colonel Monroe was always fierce for
it") and tried to debunk a few myths. "It has often been stated in print that when Mrs. Madison escaped from the
White House, she cut out from the frame the large portrait of Washington . . . and carried it off," Jennings wrote.
"This is totally false. She had no time for doing it. It would have required a ladder to get it down." (The Gilbert Stuart
painting was actually saved by a doorkeeper and a gardener, he said.) Most important, Jennings's memoir set the
genre's standard for Presidential praise. "Mr. Madison, I think, was one of the best men that ever lived," he wrote. "I
never saw him in a passion, and never knew him to strike a slave."

The modern era of such memoirs began with a gusher from the Administration of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, whose
insistence that his aides display a "passion for anonymity" had only a temporary restraining effect. The first of the
Roosevelt books, "After Seven Years," by the brain-truster Raymond Moley, established the tone: praise for the
patron that subtly shades into self-praise, inside accounts of policy struggles in which the author turns out to have
been right, a dollop of historical commentary, some gossip that gently settles old scores, and a good index for
colleagues who may not want to read the whole thing. Moley was sometimes deft enough to work many of these
themes into a single sentence: "I was able to achieve almost the impossible-the maintenance of friendly relations
with both Louis Howe and Sam Rosenman-and the rivalry of these two men was the single factor that might have
disrupted the logical course of events."

Although most such memoirs ended up in the ash bin, a few helped elevate the genre. Roosevelt's best
speechwriter, Robert E. Sherwood, who had won three Pulitzer Prizes as a playwright, won another for a memoir
cast as a character study, "Roosevelt and Hopkins." In 1965, two of John Kennedy's speechwriters produced
similarly stately tomes. Theodore Sorensen's "Kennedy" is notable for being unflinching, at least in parts. Its
assessment of the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, for instance, begins by saying of Kennedy, "His own mistakes were
many and serious," and then proceeds to catalogue them. The eminent historian Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., has
sometimes been labelled a hagiographer for the Camelot chords he struck, but "A Thousand Days" is an intricate
and serious narrative biography with sweeping historical themes and incisive drypoint character sketches. His
depiction of Secretary of State Dean Rusk is typical: "As he would talk on and on in his even, low voice, a Georgia
drawl sounding distantly under the professional tones of a foundation executive, the world itself seemed to lose
reality and dissolve into a montage of platitudes."

The Watergate scandal posed a new challenge to White House memoirists: how to deal with the character flaws
that unravelled a Presidency. William Safire, a Nixon speechwriter, set out to produce a book that would be
"sympathetic but not sycophantic," and the result, "Before the Fall," succeeds by peeling back the multiple layers of
Nixon's tortured personality and offering up candid (and amusing) portraits of Henry Kissinger and other members
of the court. Safire defended much of Nixon's record, but recognized that Nixon might be "the only genuinely tragic
hero in our history, his ruination caused by the flaws in his own character." In "White House Years," Kissinger, too,
was willing to explore the loneliness, paranoia, insecurity, and lack of generosity that infected Nixon and unsettled
his tenure. He notices the little things about Nixon-"his pant legs as always a trifle short," his look of defiance mixed
with uncertainty-and concludes by ruminating about "what extraordinary vehicles destiny selects to accomplish its
design."

It subsequently became part of the tradition for aides to try to establish their credibility and integrity, and make some
headlines, by including a few denigrating revelations about their former patrons. James Fallows, a Carter
speechwriter, wrote a magazine memoir before Carter even had a chance to run for reelection, in which he
described Carter as "passionless" and revealed that the President micromanaged the sign-up schedule for the
White House tennis court. Even more damaging was Donald T. Regan's revelation about "the most closely guarded
domestic secret" of Ronald and Nancy Reagan: "Virtually every major move and decision the Reagans made during
my time as White House Chief of Staff was cleared in advance with a woman in San Francisco who drew up
horoscopes to make certain that the planets were in a favorable alignment." The current Administration has already
produced such a memoir, by a former speechwriter, David Frum, in "The Right Man," which is generally as flattering
as the title implies but contains a few discomforting little revelations about the tenor of the White House-Frum, who

                                                                                                        Page 3 of 6
                            FIGHTING WORDS; The White House memoir grows claws.

is Jewish, opens the book with the line "Missed you at Bible study" spoken by one aide to another-and about Bush's
own shortcomings: "He is impatient and quick to anger; sometimes glib, even dogmatic; often uncurious and as a
result ill-informed; more conventional in his thinking than a leader probably should be."

Minor score-settling aside, though, previous White House memoirs tried to appear reflective, above the fray, and
candid about mistakes that were made. This was true, certainly, of the only other best-selling memoir so far from a
Clinton aide, George Stephanopoulos's "All Too Human." Stephanopoulos dealt with the scandals in an admirably
honest manner, and revealed his own conflicting emotions in an anguished portrayal of the period. "I didn't think I
was a hypocrite, because my defense of Clinton against past bimbo eruptions had been predicated on my belief
that he wouldn't create new ones, but maybe I was complicit because when I worked for Clinton I had been willing
to suspend my disbelief about some of his more suspect denials," he writes. "For several years, I had served as his
character witness. Now I felt like a dupe."

Sidney Blumenthal-who spent years covering Washington politics for The New Republic and then for The New
Yorker, before becoming an assistant to President Clinton-has no time for such self-examination. He unabashedly
rises to the President's defense in each and every (and every and every) particular, embedding a controlled,
seemingly dispassionate, and at times persuasive pro-Clinton polemic within the pages of a high-minded history. In
doing so, he has helped to create something like a new genre-the attack memoir.

The result reads like two very different books shuffled together, jostling one another uncomfortably as they alternate
turns over nearly eight hundred pages. The first book consists of Blumenthal aspiring to emulate Schlesinger. From
the opening scene, in which the new President visits the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, in Hyde Park, the author
unblushingly places himself at the center of momentous historical forces. "I could hear my own footsteps as I
walked past black-and-white photographs of FDR grandly gesturing to roaring crowds," he writes. When Bill Clinton
arrives, "the dust started to be shaken; the pinned exhibits almost seemed to want to move; the past was no longer
at rest." And then, in a metaphorical gesture, the President beckons Blumenthal over: "He wanted me to
accompany him as he toured FDR's library."

Blumenthal's assessment of Clinton occasionally transcends hagiography and approaches deification. His black
students in Arkansas, we are informed, "called him Wonder Boy for his utter absence of racial distinction," and a
member of the National Symphony "told me he was the only guest conductor they'd ever had who knew what he
was doing." By the end of the book, Clinton has been carved into the progressive pantheon with both Roosevelts.
"Just as the presidents of the late twentieth century operated in the shadow of FDR," Blumenthal declares, "those of
the first part of the twenty-first century will stand in the shadow of Clinton."

But it would be unfair, albeit easy, to make fun of Blumenthal as a human incarnation of Buddy the dog, tirelessly
chasing errant balls and panting with pure affection. When stripped of some of the excesses, his character sketches
and his digressions into the roots of great historical themes can be fascinating. He is especially enlightening about
the Third Way movement, through which Clinton and British Prime Minister Tony Blair shed the paralyzing dogmas
of the old left in order to take up policies of forceful engagement abroad along with fiscal responsibility at home. By
this approach, Blumenthal argues, Clinton showed how strong executive leadership could be brought to the cause
of progressive social policies. The result was "the greatest prosperity" in America's history, "the greatest reduction
in poverty" since Lyndon Johnson's Great Society, "the greatest public health insurance coverage of children, and
the greatest budget surplus ever." Despite Blumenthal's efforts, few will be convinced that the Clinton
Administration's haphazard policymaking was responsible for all these successes, but he does make the best
possible case that it deserves a lot of the credit.

Time and again, unfortunately, Blumenthal's revealing anecdotes and sweeping policy analysis get elbowed aside
by his parallel book, the one in which he dives into the murky depth of each successive scandal. Suddenly the tone
turns conspiratorial. A legion of enemies small and large, from Arkansas lowlifes to the independent counsel
Kenneth Starr, are woven into a tangled web of buffoons who share the same sinister motives and tactics. And
many in the press are portrayed either as willing dupes or as craven co-conspirators. (At one point, Blumenthal
accuses Time of purposefully positioning a photograph of Hillary Clinton on the cover so that the "M" in the logo
would look like devil horns. As the managing editor of the magazine then, I can attest that the "M" was in the same

                                                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                            FIGHTING WORDS; The White House memoir grows claws.

place it had been for eighty years, ever since Henry Luce decided against calling his magazine The Synthetic
Review, and that we had no diabolical designs.) Blumenthal's valid points about the tactics of the probers are thus
lost to his lack of subtlety and his unwillingness to reflect on the Clintonian behavior that created the morass in the
first place. Once again, it's necessary to strip away Blumenthal's excesses in order to uncover his insights.

The most compelling of these insights flow from his recounting of how he secretly befriended David Brock, an
apostate conservative journalist who first published the sex allegations made against Clinton by Arkansas state
troopers. On the day that the Monica Lewinsky story broke, Blumenthal called Brock, who had already been
expiating his guilt by leaking to Blumenthal the maneuvers of the most ardent Clinton-haters. Brock proceeded to
detail the collusion among Kenneth Starr's office, journalists at Newsweek, Lewinsky's turncoat confessor Linda
Tripp, the merry mischief-maker Lucianne Goldberg, the Internet gossip Matt Drudge, and a motley if not vast right-
wing conspiracy that included a collection of freelance investigators and legal "elves" funded by the conservative
millionaire Richard Mellon Scaife.

The machinations of members of this anti-Clinton cabal are interesting enough and, indeed (as many of them will
proudly admit), true enough, but Blumenthal and Hillary Clinton were notably unsuccessful at focussing press
attention on them rather than on the President's own misdeeds. One reason is that there was an even more
interesting personal question, both then and now: could these two aggressive defenders truly have believed the
President's slippery denials? Blumenthal's answer is that, on the day the story appeared, he discussed the situation
with the President and reached a tacit willingness to suspend disbelief. Both the President and his wife "wanted me
to believe the story as he told it," Blumenthal writes, "because he wanted her to believe it and she wanted to believe
him."

In Hillary's version, she did believe her husband, right up to the day, seven months later, when he was forced to
confess in his deposition. Their lawyer, Bob Barnett, tried to warn her the night before that maybe "there's more to
this than you know," but even then, she writes, she stuck with her credulity. " 'Look, Bob,' I said. 'My husband may
have his faults, but he has never lied to me.' " When she learns the following morning that he had indeed lied, she
writes, "I was dumbfounded, heartbroken and outraged that I'd believed him at all."

Like Blumenthal's, Clinton's book melds together disparate forms. One is a traditionally treacly First Lady memoir,
similar to the ghosted efforts that were produced for most of her predecessors, which dutifully describes the
pleasures of meeting so many fascinating people in so many far-flung places, all with touching tales and meaningful
lessons. In other sections, she has produced a typical campaign biography, the sort designed to lay the ground for
a future candidacy, which chronicles the formative events in her life, her evolving philosophy, and the ideals that
motivate her.

Not all of it is formulaic. There are passages that read as if she grabbed the keyboard away from her ghostwriters in
order to shake free from the perception of phoniness that dogs her. She is particularly affecting when she describes
her protective feelings toward her daughter, Chelsea, and even somewhat wry about the empty-nest syndrome that
descended when Chelsea left for Stanford. "Sometimes I'd catch Bill just sitting in Chelsea's bedroom, looking
around wistfully," she writes. "I had to admit that my husband and I were caught up in a generational cliche, a
milestone in life that only members of our self-conscious age group would define as a syndrome."

On policy issues as well, she is often revealing. She provides, for example, a detailed description of her role in the
debates over the President's welfare-reform proposals, and says, "I told him and his top staff that I would speak out
against any bill" if it did not contain certain liberal safeguards. Unlike previous First Ladies, she is not shy about
crediting herself as a full policy partner: "By the time Bill and I left the White House, welfare rolls had dropped 60
percent." She tells how she pushed her husband to barrel ahead with her doomed plan for national health-care
coverage, and in a small deviation from the account by Blumenthal, who is not even mentioned until page 422 of
her book, she takes a good deal of the credit for organizing the Third Way discussions with Prime Minister Blair.

What's most striking, however, is the way she has interspersed her campaign biography and First Lady memoir with
sections in which, like Blumenthal, she wages a Manichaean struggle against the Vast Conspiracy. Despite the
drama of the four pages describing her fury at her husband's betrayal, most of her anger in the five hundred and

                                                                                                           Page 5 of 6
                             FIGHTING WORDS; The White House memoir grows claws.

thirty other pages is directed at the enemies she claims sought to destroy his Presidency. This is what motivated
her, she says, to reconcile with her husband. "If men like Starr and his allies could ignore the Constitution and
abuse power for ideological and malicious ends to topple a President, I feared for my country," she explains. "Bill's
Presidency, the institutional Presidency and the integrity of the Constitution hung in the balance. I knew what I did
and said in the next days and weeks would influence not just Bill's future and mine, but also America's."

She is no less assertive than Blumenthal in her depiction of the enemies they were battling:

I do believe there was, and still is, an interlocking network of groups and individuals who want to turn the clock back
on many of the advances our country has made, from civil rights and women's rights to consumer and
environmental regulation, and they use all the tools at their disposal-money, power, influence, media and politics-to
achieve their ends. In recent years, they have also mastered the politics of personal destruction. Fueled by
extremists who have been fighting progressive politicians and ideas for decades, they are funded by corporations,
foundations and individuals like Richard Mellon Scaife.

Although she does not descend to the "politics of personal destruction"- there are no dark intimations of murder or
sex scandals-she is not averse to firing a bit of buckshot. When Newt Gingrich's mother let slip that her son, the
new House Speaker, often referred to Hillary as a "bitch," she invited them both, along with his "then wife," to the
White House. What ensues is a scene in which Gingrich's wife belittles him for babbling about things he does not
understand, and his mother retorts, "Newty always knows what he's talking about." Similarly, she ridicules Chief
Justice William Rehnquist for presiding over her husband's Senate trial wearing a robe he had designed with
chevrons of gold braid. "He said he got the idea from the costumes in a production of Gilbert & Sullivan's comic
opera Iolanthe," she writes. "How fitting that he should wear a theatrical costume to preside over a political farce."

Both Blumenthal and Clinton, with their wrenching lurches from policy discourses to scandal dissections, are able to
re-create the vertigo of the era, during which missile attacks on Al Qaeda came in the wake of squirmy testimony
about inappropriate behavior, and stories about Moscow summits vied with those about distinguishing genital
characteristics. They also present a largely persuasive case that prosecutors and the press (though not the
American public) became overly, even weirdly, obsessed with the Whitewater story. Combined with their excesses
of loyalty and their unwillingness to reflect on the President's pathological indiscipline, the result is yet another type
of vertigo: that which comes from rolling your eyes and nodding your head at the same time.

These books, of course, will not for a moment sway any of the Clintons' ardent adversaries, nor does that seem to
be their intention. Like much of the discourse from the period, they appear to be meant to stoke old partisan
arguments rather than to quell them. In this they exemplify the very trend-the shrilling of political discourse-that they
decry.

Raucous, partisan debate can be healthy, up to a point, and liberals will point out that conservatives have
heretofore dominated the best-seller lists, as well as cable television, and have been notably more aggressive in
tearing down their opponents. Partly that is because liberals are less cohesive and angry, more timid and easily
cowed. Even when liberals have strong beliefs, they act as if they were not quite sure they actually agree with them.
They are congenitally more comfortable humming the theme of "All Things Considered" than the theme of
"Crossfire."

Until now, the most successful authors on the provocative left have been those who cloaked their jabs with humor,
such as Michael Moore, Molly Ivins and Al Franken. This may be changing. All three will be publishing more
pugnacious books this year, and so will the liberal columnists Paul Krugman and Joe Conason. Eventually, they
may even be joined by Bill Clinton, if he decides to emulate his wife and his old Knight Templar by producing a
memoir that ravages as well as ruminates.

All this best-selling bellicosity is likely to continue the trend away from the old recollected-in-tranquillity manner of
White House memoirs. At the very least, it will make for more interesting reading. And we are unlikely to miss, at
least for a while, the quaint platitudes of a Raymond Moley, who concluded his memoir by calling for a future
politics based on "fine thinking and generous impulse."

                                                                                   Page 6 of 6
                           FIGHTING WORDS; The White House memoir grows claws.



  
