

                                                                                          Page 1 of 3
          SPEAK SOFTLY AND CARRY A BIG SPEECH; FDR's inaugural address offered hope to a nation




     SPEAK SOFTLY AND CARRY A BIG SPEECH; FDR's inaugural address
                       offered hope to a nation
                                             The San Diego Union-Tribune
                                              September 8, 2002, Sunday



Copyright 2002 The San Diego Union-Tribune

Section: BOOKS;Pg. BOOKS-2; REVIEW.
Length: 616 words
Byline: William W. Starr; (c) The State (Columbia, S.C.)

'Recognition of that falsity of material wealth as the standard of success goes hand in hand with the abandonment
of the false belief that public office and high political position are to be valued only by the standards of pride and
place and personal profit. And there must be an end to conduct in banking and in business which too often has
given to a sacred trust the likeness of callous and selfish wrongdoing."

Strong words, indeed. Do they come from the lips of President Bush? Or congressional reformers? Or district
attorneys prosecuting executives from Enron, WorldCom and their ilk?

No. The words are from Franklin D. Roosevelt's first inaugural address, delivered March 4, 1933, when the nation
faced an economic crisis even worse than the one in which it is mired today.

That was the speech that included the now-famous and oft-quoted aphorism, "The only thing we have to fear is fear
itself."

It was an inaugural address offering hope to the hopeless, rivaled only by Lincoln's inaugural and the first delivered
by George Washington. Author Davis Houck, professor of communications at Florida State University, says it was
even more important judging from the thousands of responses FDR received, which Houck read researching this
concise new book.

"FDR and Fear Itself" is a vivid and readable recounting of the circumstances that led to the inaugural address, as
well as a study of how and why the speech was put together.

The unsung hero was Raymond Moley, a professor who had become close to Roosevelt before the 1932
presidential election and who joined his staff as speechwriter and aide, part of the administration's first "brain trust."
Houck writes that Moley was the chief architect of the address, with contributions from FDR and the president's
close confidant, Louis Howe.

Moley's contributions were substantial and, in many quarters, still unrecognized. FDR "definitely wanted to take
credit" for the inaugural, and some historians (notably James McGregor Burns) have virtually written Moley out of
his part in the preparation. This book offers the restorative to that view. (It was, however, Howe who came up with
the familiar line about "fear.")

                                                                                         Page 2 of 3
         SPEAK SOFTLY AND CARRY A BIG SPEECH; FDR's inaugural address offered hope to a nation

The drafts that preceded the address are discussed fully, and to flesh out the arrival of Roosevelt in Washington to
begin his term, Houck adds sketches of FDR and wife Eleanor and their lives before the election. These will help
some readers better understand their complex relationship, though the account occasionally veers toward the
melodramatic.

Houck's style is lively and his focus dramatic in narrative; this is no turgid history, as the subject might suggest. It
relies heavily on Moley's voluminous papers and letters -- he apparently was something of a pack rat -- though the
author said he does a "bit of surmising based on historical materials at various places in the manuscripts."

The address, only 1,929 words, is worthy enough to be included twice in the 166 pages of the book. Its passages
again seem to reflect directly on our own times, as when Roosevelt called a restoration of civilization to "ancient
truths," adding, "The measure of that restoration lies in the extent to which we apply social values more noble than
mere monetary profit."

To which Houck appends this note: "Somewhere in the bold and determined delivery, the carefully worded policies,
the assertive and clear statements, the ringing indictments and the promise of immediate action, the American
people found reason again to believe, to hope, and to see beyond the landscapes of their own immediate future."

FDR and Fear Itself

The First Inaugural Address

Davis W. Houck

Texas A&M University Press, 160 pages, $29.95 ($14.95 paperback)



 
