

                                                                                                           Page 1 of 3
                                              ON LANGUAGE; SHOO-IN




                                               ON LANGUAGE;
                                                  SHOO-IN
                                                 The New York Times
                                    October 7, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition



Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company

Section: Section 6; Page 18, Column 3; Magazine Desk
Length: 1222 words
Byline: By William Safire

Citing the lowering of the ''misery index'' - that addition of the unemployment rate to the inflation rate - Leonard Silk,
economics columnist of The New York Times, wrote: ''Mr. Reagan could have some reason to regard himself as a
shoe-in.''

Judy Westerman of New York assumes that shoe-in is a typographical error for shoo-in, and wonders if writers will
not turn to other up-to-date phrases of finality like carved in stone or made in the shade. But when queried, Mr. Silk
does not take refuge in the old typo excuse (which has grown difficult since word-processing terminals have made
us our own typesetters).

''I used shoo-in to mean 'a walkaway, an easy win,' '' says my colleague, who is known to lexicographers as the
coiner of double digit. ''I don't know why I spelled it shoe-in. I just bought some shoes.'' It could be that this
misspelling, a frequent one, is influenced by shoehorn, a verb meaning ''to insert into a difficult space'' or ''to fit in
with difficulty.''
William Safire article on use of slang metaphors, mispronounciation of Halloween and misuse of word schism;
drawing (M)

Slang metaphors change their meanings as they are applied in different fields. Mr. Silk's political meaning, ''easy
win,'' is accurate; in racing, however, where the term originated, the term retains a more sinister meaning. To shoo
is a centuries-old colloquialism for ''to urge a person or animal to move in a desired direction.'' Back in the bad old
days, corrupt jockeys would form a ''ring'' and bet on a single horse, holding back their own mounts while they
''shooed in'' the winner. In a horseracing shoo-in, the winner is the only horse trying to win; that corrupt connotation
does not apply in politics.

In a related development from the world of in-and-out, this letter from Judge Theodore Trautwein of the Superior
Court of New Jersey: ''The other day my law clerk told me that she had really lucked out on the purchase of her new
car. I asked her if she was happy with the deal. She was indeed!''

The appellate jurist poses the slanguistic issue: ''When things go bad, one is 'out of luck' and vice versa. Hence, I
would have employed the expression lucked in under her circumstance.'' He requests my ruling.

The judge is going by the book: in the Dictionary of American Slang, lucked out is defined as ''to have met with ill
fortune.'' But that was back in the 1940's, and lots of things have been turned on their heads since then. In 1954,
American Speech magazine was citing campus usages of to luck out, meaning ''to achieve success by good luck,''

                                                                                                             Page 2 of 3
                                               ON LANGUAGE; SHOO-IN

with the example of not being assigned Saturday classes. Today, ba-a-ad means ''good,'' reports of economic
growth can prompt stock-market downturns, and to luck out is to luck in.

I'm speculating because the lack of research on this point has been unfortunate, but I think this has to do with the
way out is used to form new verbs. In standard English, we have such compounds as break out, sit out and fall out,
so the device is not new; but in slang, we have witnessed an Out Explosion, as coinages have ranged from drop
out, cop out and sack out to the more recent veg out, pig out and spazz out.

Out is in and in is out. Along the way, luck ran out - that is, to luck in, or fall into luck, became to luck out. The other
form still exists, but the in is almost always into: one may luck into something, but the usage is not nearly as
common as to luck out.

That's the breaks, judge. Appeal denied. Listen to your clerk, get with it, and you will have it made in the shade.

Hallow

Rings Hollow

Here is this month's red- flag pronunciation alert: ''I am waiting for Oct. 31 to roll around,'' writes Eleanor Blau of
New York, ''wondering whether that holiday will be mispronounced again this year. Is it sloppiness or ignorance
which (sic) accounts for the mispronunciation of Halloween as Holloween?''

Neither; it's a newer way to pronounce it. Halloween, or Hallowe'en, is All Hallows Evening, with hallow meaning
''sacred,'' or as a noun, a synonym for ''saint.'' The first syllable is pronounced hol by some, but hal is still preferred
in the United States. Although we pronounce swallow as if the first syllable had an o, we prefer not to do that with
hallow, as everyone familiar with ''hallow'd be Thy name'' will attest.

In Merriam-Webster's Ninth Collegiate, this nice distinction is made: Halloween is pronounced hal-uh- ween, and a
second pronunciation is listed with the a in the first syllable having two dots over it. That means the a is pronounced
like the o in ''cottage.''

I suspect that the pronunciation in this country is shifting, and the hallow is ringing hollow. When the kids come
trick-or-treating at the end of the month, I'll ask them which holiday it is. Those that say Halloween will get an extra
handful of candy corn, because I like to encourage traditionalism.

Respectfully Disagree

When you disagree with your superior, or your friend, or someone you respect, how do you put him in his place?
Answer: by putting him in a figurative place or state.

The Rev. Paul A. Wickens, a priest in the Archdiocese of Newark, is in a feud with his Archbishop, at least in part
because of the prelate's support for a nuclear freeze. After Father Wickens suggested that churchgoers withhold
their Sunday contributions, the Archbishop decided to suspend him and to evict him from the rectory.

The rambunctious priest announced coolly: ''I believe my Archbishop is in schism.''

Where is schism, anyway? That word - originally pronounced ''sizzem'' but now more often pronounced ''skizem'' -
is a noun meaning ''split.'' In theological circles, however, Splitsville is a most specific state of being. I consulted
Father William Hill of the Catholic University's School of Theology for a definition.

''In schism refers to a division in canonical terms,'' he replied. ''That division may be disciplinary as opposed to
doctrinal. Doctrinal issues would involve ideas like the belief in the divinity of Jesus, while disciplinary matters have
to do with the exercise of authority - for example, one bishop intruding upon another bishop's area. It is possible to
be in schism in disciplinary issues without being divided in doctrinal areas.''

                                                                                                   Page 3 of 3
                                           ON LANGUAGE; SHOO-IN

I ran across a similar state a generation ago, researching the origin of Franklin Delano Roosevelt's use of ''new
deal.'' Judge Samuel I. Rosenman told me that he had drafted the peroration to Mr. Roosevelt's acceptance speech
to the 1932 Democratic National Convention: ''I pledge you, I pledge myself, to a new deal for the American
people.''

Raymond Moley, another Brain Truster and later a columnist for Newsweek, took sharp exception to this when I
called about it. He pointed to evidence in a book of his, ''After Seven Years,'' that showed the phrase was
suggested by him. How did Professor Moley react when it was pointed out that his old colleague remembered
history somewhat differently?

He did not direct his ire at the man personally; Raymond the Mole did not say that Sammy the Rose had a lousy
memory or was mistaken or wrong. Instead, he chose a delicate but unbudging usage: ''When Rosenman says that
he wrote it,'' Moley said, ''he is in error.''

Disputants who use civil phrases like that are in a graceful state. Where do you hear an argument these days that
goes ''You're in schism'' or ''You're in error''? I'm in awe.

Classification
Language: ENGLISH


Subject: INFLATION (90%); POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (90%); WRITERS (90%); DICTIONARIES &
THESAURI (89%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (89%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (89%);
UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (89%); LINGUISTICS (78%); HORSE RACING (69%); APPEALS (64%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (60%)


Industry: WRITERS (90%)


Geographic: UNITED STATES (79%)


  
