

                                                                                                    Page 1 of 2
                                                     Moley, Dr. Jeffrey Fletcher 64




                                            Moley, Dr. Jeffrey Fletcher 64
                                                  St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
                                                      October 19, 2017 Thursday
                                                             THIRD EDITION



Copyright 2017 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc. All Rights Reserved

Section: CLASSIFIED ADVERTISING
Moley, Dr. Jeffrey Fletcher 64, passed away suddenly at his home on October 15. He was world-renowned for his
scientific research and expertise in the endocrine surgical field. He was Professor of Surgery and Chief of the
Section of Endocrine and Oncologic Surgery at Washington University in St. Louis. He was also an Associate
Director of the Siteman Cancer Center, and the Chief of Surgical Services at the VA Hospital.

He was well-known in the St. Louis Medical community and was a highly respected teacher and role model to his
medical trainees. Dr. Moley was born in New York City on September 13, 1953, to Dr. Malcolm Moley and Mrs.
Janis Walton Moley. He is survived by his wife, Dr. Kelle H. Moley, and sons Patrick Malcom, Charles Raymond,
and John Roger. Other survivors include his mother, his brother Roger Walton Moley, and sister Janis McCarthy.
Dr. Moley was the grandson of Raymond Moley, a Columbia University professor and member of President
Franklin D. Roosevelt's "Brain Trust." He was widely respected for his participation and/or leadership of clinical
research projects in surgical management of recurrent disease, preventive thyroidectomy in Multiple Endocrine
Neoplasia 2 gene carriers, as well as the identification of novel molecular targets in thyroid cancer. He was an
accomplished musician, who led the local bands Seldom Home and The Fletcher Moley Group. He had a wonderful
sense of humor and was extremely knowledgeable in a wide variety of areas such as sports, politics, and history.
He loved his family dearly and was beloved in return. He will be greatly missed. Services: Funeral will be held at
Grace Episcopal Church at 514 East Aragonne Avenue in Kirkwood at 3:00 PM Thursday, October 19. In lieu of
flowers please donate to AMEND USA, The Association for Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia Disorders, PO Box
927327 San Diego, CA, 92192, or www.amend.org.uk



  
