

                                                                                                        Page 1 of 4
                                        The Federal Reserves Magic Money




                                The Federal Reserves Magic Money
                                                     PA Pundits
                                     November 14, 2010 Sunday 6:02 AM EST



Copyright 2010 Newstex LLC
All Rights Reserved
Newstex Web Blogs
Copyright 2010 PA Pundits

        By Alan Caruba


Historically, the Federal Reserve has had a poor record when it comes to correcting an economic slide into
Depression.

 In his book, œNew Deal or Raw Deal? historian Burton Folsom, Jr, asked and answered the question œWhat
caused the Great Depression? Among the factors he cited was the huge debt left over from World War One. In the
United States, the national debt had ballooned from $1.3 billion to $24 billion in three short years, half of which
consisted of loans made to the allies.


 Today the U.S. is feeling the impact of the aftermath of 9/11 when military action was taken first in 2001 and then in
2003. We are still in Afghanistan and Iraq without much to show for it. As opposed to short, preemptive, lightning
strikes, we have become involved in œnation building. Forgotten is the fact that it was the Russian intervention in
Afghanistan that ultimately brought down the former Soviet Union.

 In the 1930s, in addition to tariffs on imported goods, œThe third cause of the Great Depression was the poor
performance of the Federal Reserve, concluded Folsom. œThe Federal Reserve was created in 1913 to control the
money system by regulating interest rates and lending money to banks.


 In an eerie way, Raymond Moley, a member of Franklin D. Roosevelts œbrain trust of advisors and an initial
advocate of the New Deal, reflects the widespread perception of Barack Obama today. In 1933 Moley broke with
FDR and became a conservative. Following a meeting with FDR, Moley recorded his observations.

 œI was impressed as never before by the utter lack of logic of the man, the scantiness of his precise knowledge of
things that he was talking about, the gross inaccuracies in his statements, by the almost pathological lack of
sequence in his statements, by the complete rectitude that he felt as to his own conduct, by the immense and
growing egotism that come from his office, by his willingness to continue the excoriation of the press and business

                                                                                                      Page 2 of 4
                                       The Federal Reserves Magic Money

in order to get votes for himself, by his indifference to what effort the long continued pursuit of these ends would
have upon the civilization in which he was playing a part.

This description of FDR is, in astonishing ways, a mirror image of Barack Hussein Obama.


 The dissatisfaction that Moley expressed has been manifested in the immergence of the Tea Party movement and
the rejection of many in Congress who supported Obamas agenda, including Obamacare, his failed efforts to jump-
start the economy with large, temporary stimulus bills, temporary housing rebates and business tax credits, and the
one-time cash-for-clunkers program that followed the federal takeover of General Motors (NYSE:GM) and Chrysler.

 There are harsh facts being ignored about the present economic crisis. More than 42 million Americans were on
food stamps in August, an all-time record and a number that is 17% higher than a year ago. The U.S. is
experiencing massive unemployment and the American Bankruptcy Institute predicts there will be an estimated 1.6
million consumer bankruptcies this year.

The U.S. government is completely and totally broke. A Boston University economics professor, Laurence J.
Kotlikoff, has concluded that the U.S. government is facing a œfiscal gap of $202 trillion dollars.


 John Allison, who for two decades served as chairman and CEO of BB&T (NYSE:BBT) , the nation's 10th largest
bank, told CNSNews.com that it is a œmathematical certaintythe United States government œwill go bankrupt
unless it dramatically changes its fiscal direction immediately.

 Having tried œquantitative easing once already the Federal Reserve is undertaking a second effort. It consists of
printing magical money and using it to purchase U.S. treasury securities. QE-1 cost $1.7 trillion and did not work.
QE-2 will fail as well to the tune of $0.9 trillion.

 The U.S. dollar has lost 50% of its purchasing power since 1986 and it has dropped 11% in value since June of this
year.

 Writing in the November 8 edition of The Wall Street Journal, Kevin M. Warsh, a member of the Federal Reserves
Board of Governors, went public to warn against QE-2. œFiscal authorities should resist the temptation to increase
government expenditures to compensate for shortfalls of private consumption and investment, said Warsh who
urged œa strict economic diet of fiscal austerity.

 Whether it is Congress or the Federal Reserve, the failures of the present reflect the failures of the past. Major
surgery is needed to pare the entitlement programs of Social Security and Medicare. Instead, Obamacare added
millions to the Medicare rolls.

 The government sponsored entities, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, need to be privatized to avoid using billions
more in public funds to save them and the too-big-to-fail banks that engaged in œliars loans; mortgage loans that
ignored prudent lending practices resulting in the housing market collapse.

 TARP did work as an emergency measure, but the government has got to stop being the lender of last resort. Its
our money.

 The Federal Reserve is contemplating the creation of œmagical money at a time when the U.S. economy is in
deep trouble. It is a trouble that can only be cured by retaining the Bush tax cuts and by simplifying the current
insane tax code. Why is there such slow growth? American corporations pay the second highest tax rate in the
world.

                                                                                                       Page 3 of 4
                                        The Federal Reserves Magic Money

 The burden of federal regulation must be reduced. Economists W. Mark and Nicole Crain, noted in a September
Wall Street Journal that œThe annual cost of federal regulations increased to more than $1.75 trillion in 2008, a 3%
real increase over five years, to about 14% of U.S. national income.


 The Presidents original economic advisors have departed. They, like Raymond Moley in the 1930s, know that he
is either clueless and/or resistant to any pragmatic solutions.

 The midterm elections gave power to the Republicans in the House, the branch from which all financial bills must
originate. Failing to do the same in the Senate, it may take two years to repeal Obamacare, but efforts must be
taken to defund it, to render it inoperable. The courts may offer relief with a decision that it is unconstitutional.

When the new Congress meets in January 2011, every pressure possible must be brought to bear on the Federal
Reserve to stop short-term failed œsolutions before the U.S. dollar is utterly debased.


© Alan Caruba, 2010 Alan Caruba blogs daily at             Warning Signs . An author, business and science writer,
he is the founder of   National Anxiety Center.


Newstex ID: PPUN-5395-50725102



Notes
The views expressed on blogs distributed by Newstex and its re-distributors ("Blogs on Demand®") are solely the
author's and not necessarily the views of Newstex or its re-distributors. Posts from such authors are provided "AS
IS", with no warranties, and confer no rights. The material and information provided in Blogs on Demand® are for
general information only and should not, in any respect, be relied on as professional advice. No content on such
Blogs on Demand® is "read and approved" before it is posted. Accordingly, neither Newstex nor its re-distributors
make any claims, promises or guarantees about the accuracy, completeness, or adequacy of the information
contained therein or linked to from such blogs, nor take responsibility for any aspect of such blog content. All
content on Blogs on Demand® shall be construed as author-based content and commentary. Accordingly, no
warranties or other guarantees will be offered as to the quality of the opinions, commentary or anything else offered
on such Blogs on Demand®. Reader's comments reflect their individual opinion and their publication within Blogs
on Demand® shall not infer or connote an endorsement by Newstex or its re-distributors of such reader's comments
or views. Newstex and its re-distributors expressly reserve the right to delete posts and comments at its and their
sole discretion.



 
