




The New York Times
July 17, 1980, Thursday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1980 The New York Times Company
Section: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk; op-ed
Length: 850 words
Dateline: DETROIT, July 16
Body


''I pledge you, I pledge myself, to a new deal for the American people.'' Those ringing words - submitted to Franklin Roosevelt in 1932 by either Raymond Moley or Samuel Rosenman, depending on whose memoirs you believe - set the modern standard for a convention's acceptance address.
Today, Ronald Reagan is doing what he calls the final ''jewelry work'' on a speech of his own conception, crafted by writer Peter Hannaford, with contributions by Richard Whalen, William Gavin, George Gilder, Peter Rustoven and others.
As F.D.R. demonstrated, a challenger's acceptance speech must show a grasp of what his campaign is about, combined with an emotional uplift in a style of his own. Here's a checklist to help judge the Reagan acceptance.
AN-A
1. Viewing with alarm. Without drawing up a laundry list of complaints, the compleat acceptor is expected to touch the bases of discontent: with Governor Reagan, this is likely to be a denunciation of defeatism, a blast at the ''trust me'' plea that proved so untrustworthy, and the back of his hand to ''the dead hand of Federal Government.'' He will point out that American defense strength is at its lowest ebb in a generation, while the Russians (not ''the Soviets,'' as diplomats say) are spending three times as much as we do on strategic arms and increasing that by 4 to 5 percent a year.
2. Outlining his answer. He will seek to embody this year's rolereversals of the parties, seizing the high ground of growth and productivity. Reagan's pledge to cut taxes will be given philosophic context, and tied to restraint in spending and to regulatory relief; only by ''setting our house in order'' can we renew our world strength.
3. Reassuring the worried. He is not on the stump, but the bully pulpit: Reagan's drafts did not trot out the horrible examples of welfarist excess, but reaffirmed the responsibility to maintain a safety net for all those who need help. The word ''prudence'' should show up. Feminists may note that if ''mankind'' is used, it will pass the candidates' lips as the newly acceptable ''humankind.''
4. Evoking past greatness. The source of quotations is significant. A choice of Tom Paine signals toleration of dissent, while the choice of the Federalist Papers shows respect for intellect. A Lincoln quote is always in order, provided it is not the usual ''We must think anew,'' which holds so many Republican speakers in thrall. The American spirit should be invoked, offering hope that we can recapture control of our own destiny, and an F.D.R. quotation would be apt in a speech by a former Democrat.
5. Providing catnip for commentators. A successful acceptance should not only enable adman Peter Dailey to sniff out applause lines for TV spots (''Let's put Americans to work''), but should fuel profound speculation by the long-headed chin-pullers of op-ed. A ''new coalition'' is too hackneyed and too often associated with overt political activity: better, it is thought, to call for a ''community of shared values.'' That web connects diffuse concerns for family ties, the work ethic, neighborhood pride, peace, freedom and whatever else is good that seems to be on the wane.
6. Trying out a slogan. Jimmy Carter floated out ''the New Spirit'' seven times in his inaugural address, and ''the New Foundation'' later - both slogans crumbled dispiritedly. This 1980 Republican Convention has been touting ''a new beginning,'' which was Ed Muskie's 1972 slogan, and that warmed-over phrase should be ending soon.
Watch for a new something in Reagan's acceptance, repeated once, and not capitalized in the text - if it catches on, fine, and if not, no straining is shown. One idea has been a ''new compact,'' to characterize the community of shared values cited above. The speechwriters are aware that if ''the new compact'' takes off, wags will talk of powder puffs in mirrored boxes, and cartoonists will portray the Reagan Administration tooling along in a small car. But ''The New Deal'' was derided as ''the no-deal'' and ''the raw deal,'' and that never stopped the New Dealers.
7. Inspiring the nation with a peroration. In the final three minutes of an acceptance speech, tradition permits the candidate a certain latitude of patriotic or personal emotion; what would be dismissed as sentimental or even cloying in other circumstances is not out of place on this occasion. If a peroration misses, it is schmaltz; if it hits, it is leadership.
Advisers and writers not otherwise uptight or secretive about the contents of the Reagan acceptance speech fall absolutely silent when questioned about the peroration. At least one retired Presidential speechwriter would suggest concluding with a message to 50 forgotten Americans prohibited from attending any political convention or partaking of the other freedoms the rest of us take for granted. The most memorable and effective conclusion is not one that brings conventioneers to their feet but one that leaves the nation with a lump in its throat.
We'll see whether Reagan and his writers are up to it. Around some celestial radio set, F.D.R., Moley and Rosenman will be listening.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (79%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (73%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (72%); EMOTIONS (69%); MILITARY WEAPONS (65%); PRODUCTIVITY (64%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (50%)

Industry: MILITARY WEAPONS (65%)

Person: RONALD REAGAN (90%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (93%)


End of Document
