




The New York Times
April 13, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 6; Page 16, Column 2; Magazine Desk
Length: 1145 words
Byline: By WILLIAM SAFIRE
Body


RIGHT IS NOT ALWAYS the right word.
You are in a taxicab. You are familiar with your destination, but the driver is not. He asks, ''Make a left at the next corner?'' You want him to do that, but the word that leaps to your lips is ''right'' - you know that is the wrong word, because it may cause him to switch lanes to turn right, causing a great screeching of tires behind you, followed by terrible anguish at Lloyd's of London. So what do you say?
The bookish reader, who has never faced this terrible moment, will suggest serenely that the proper answer in that situation is ''yes.'' That reader does not live in the real world of directions and turns and sudden stops and outraged cursing. If you, the direction-giver, are ready to say ''yes,'' your alternative answer is ''no''; and if you want the driver to turn right when he asks if you want him to turn left, ''no'' is a stupid, inadequate response.
Those of us who like our directions to be crisp and unambiguous are ready with three responses to the query ''Make a left?'' If left is not the direction desired, answer ''Make a right'' or ''Straight ahead.'' If left is your way to go, the correct and unconfusing answer is ''correct.'' Whatever your direction, stay away from the word right - it causes accidents.
In a similar way, wrong is not always the right word.
A recent Op-Ed page in The Washington Post on the subject of aid to the contras in Nicaragua had these headlines: ''Kirkpatrick and Krauthammer Are Wrong,'' ''Podhoretz Is Wrong'' and -in the only headline that nobody would find objectionable - ''The Post Is Wrong.''
Wrong is a word that editorialists like, because we are by nature opinionated, and wrong rings with the voice of judgment. ''Virginia,'' wrote Francis P. Church in the most famous editorial ever, ''your little friends are wrong.''
So are your little headline writers, Meg. Wrong is one of those sweeping words that contain a multitude of charges. When you blast someone for being wrong, do you mean what he says is incorrect, false, inaccurate, imprecise? Or do you intend the word to convey a charge of venality, that your target is himself evil, improper, unethical, unrighteous, bad, perhaps willfully misleading? Does your wrong carry a deliciously crackbrained connotation so often found in unwitting dupe, which so many of us take to mean a combination of nitwit and dope? Or do you mean merely that your opponent in debate is mistaken?
As right is akin to the Latin for ''straight,'' wrong is rooted in the Old Norse for ''twisted.'' That pair of meanings is simple enough, but right and wrong have become bifurcated (big word in academic circles, bifurcated; try it at the next faculty party as you try to spear a shrimp with a two-pronged fork). Correct and incorrect now vie with good and bad in telling right and wrong from right and wrong.
Example: B. Gallagher of Cleveland Heights, Ohio, sends me a brochure received from the Book-of-the-Month Club selling ''A Treasury for Word Lovers,'' by Morton S. Freeman, which blurbs: ''An invaluable resource for everyone who wants to express themselves correctly. . . .'' Back to the recasting couch, copywriter: change the everyone who wants to all who want or, if you're not afraid of feminists, change the themselves to himself. That Mistake-of-the-Month is not wrong; it's only incorrect. To be mistaken is not to be wrong; a slip of the tongue is not a fall from grammatical grace, nor is a solecism a sin.
Precision in disputation adds to civility in discourse. (Sentences like that make me want to bifurcate.) If your target is evil incarnate, excoriate him for being in the wrong and label him a real wrongo. Recognize the informality and imprecision of ''You're wrong.''
Try another formulation that lets you be different in your differing. I was trying to find the origin of New Deal for my political dictionary; the phrase was used by Mark Twain, David Lloyd George and Woodrow Wilson, but to get the coiner in the Roosevelt era, I wrote to Judge Samuel I. Rosenman, author of many of Franklin Delano Roosevelt's speeches and the editor of F.D.R.'s papers. He allowed as how he had worked on the peroration to the acceptance speech at the 1932 Democratic National Convention, when the candidate said, ''I pledge you, I pledge myself, to a new deal for the American people.''
Then I asked another man who worked on F.D.R. speeches, the columnist Raymond Moley, who wrote back: ''The expression new deal was in the draft which I left at Albany with Roosevelt.''
But what of Rosenman's indication that the phrase was his contribution? Was Sammy the Rose wrong and Raymond the Mole right?
Here is how Mr. Moley handled that: ''When Rosenman says that he wrote it, he is in error.''
In error. Not wrong; not even mistaken; merely in a state of incorrectness, perhaps not his fault. That's a riposte that shows class. Flush Right TOILET USED TO BE THE word we most often used for a lavatory. Then along came American euphemisms such as restroom and comfort station, along with the British euphemisms water closet and loo. According to a Dictionary of American Regional English survey, some responses to the question ''What do you call an indoor toilet?'' were bathroom, commode, john and Mrs. Jones. It seemed as if toilet was falling into disuse.
Along came the charge that the Defense Department had paid $640 for a toilet seat, which critics of defense spending made symbolic of waste and inefficiency in Pentagon procurement. At a televised press conference, a reporter asked the President, ''. . . Why did you so strongly denounce the misrepresentation of Secretary Weinberger as being wasteful and the cartooning of him with a toilet seat around his neck. . . .?''
President Reagan replied: ''. . . We didn't buy any $600 toilet seat. We bought a $600 molded plastic cover for the entire toilet system.''
By focusing on toilet seat, for which there was no euphemism, the Pentagon critics (and cartoonist Herblock) stopped the erosion of the word toilet; by elevating the toilet seat to part of a modern entire toilet system - a proud component of a technological advance in a formerly mechanical process - the President rescued the word for generations to come.
The Pentagon spokesman trained to handle toilet queries is named, through no fault of his own, Glenn Flood. He says: ''The original price we were charged was $640, not just for a toilet seat, but for the large molded plastic assembly covering the entire seat, tank and full toilet assembly. The seat itself cost nine dollars and some cents.'' He adds, ''The supplier charged too much, and we had the amount corrected.''
It's a relief for taxpayers to know that there is no ''$640 toilet seat,'' but more important, lexicographers on both sides of the Atlantic are flushed with excitement at the de-tabooization of a plain word that started out as a euphemism itself.

Graphic

 
Drawing
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (78%); WRITERS (73%); NEWS BRIEFS (62%)

Company: LLOYD'S OF LONDON (GAMBIA)  (71%);  LLOYD'S OF LONDON (UK)  (71%);  WASHINGTON POST CO  (53%);    GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO  (53%);  NASH HOLDINGS LLC  (53%); LLOYD'S OF LONDON (GAMBIA)  (71%);  LLOYD'S OF LONDON (UK)  (71%);  WASHINGTON POST CO  (53%);    GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO  (53%);  NASH HOLDINGS LLC  (53%)

Ticker: WPO (NYSE)  (53%);    GHC (NYSE)  (53%)

Industry: SIC6411 INSURANCE AGENTS, BROKERS, & SERVICE  (71%);  SIC6311 LIFE INSURANCE  (71%);  NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS  (53%);  NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING  (53%);  NAICS511120 PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS  (53%);  NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS  (53%);    SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING  (53%); WRITERS (73%)

Geographic: NICARAGUA (53%)


End of Document
