



National Review
March 13, 2006 


Copyright 2006 National Review All Rights Reserved
Length: 2000 words
Byline: William F. Buckley Jr.
Body


NEW YORK, FEBRUARY 7
We are told that 960 books have been written about Ronald Reagan, which registers that he continues to be an object of consuming historical curiosity, 95 years after he was born. That emanation confounds liberal critics, who assessed him many years ago as a bumpkin with oratorical gifts pandering to American self-esteem.
But Reagan alive prevailed over that stereotype, and Reagan dead is airborne as never before. One recent book, President Reagan: The Triumph of Imagination, is by Richard Reeves, a skillful historian who got on to an enormously interesting device in his books on Nixon and Kennedy. He would take you to opening day of their presidential terms and recount what his subject did on that day, which of course was an opening to political, social, and personal adventures.
Reagan ended his eight years snug in the White House, though Reeves judges him to have been less, in 1989, than the Reagan who took office in 1981, which is okay by Reeves as, on the whole, he prefers a diminished Reagan to a Reagan in his prime, who might have succeeded with his right-wing agenda.
Reeves concedes that in foreign policy Reagan "succeeded." He did so by "scrapping containment and détente and making the world believe it when he rejected the old Cold War strategies in favor of his own, which he articulated to his first national security adviser, Richard Allen." Reagan said to Allen, "I know you think I don't have a strategy for dealing with Communism, but I do: We win. They lose."
Lance Morrow, in a stunning collection of essays (Second Drafts of History), remembers Reagan in the 1984 reelection campaign, battling Walter Mondale. Their first debate was perilous because Reagan was off his form and Mondale did well. But "the voters came to absorb Ronald Reagan in an entirely different and subjective manner. They internalized him. In later months, Reagan found his way onto a different plane of the American mind, a mythic plane. He became not just a politician, not just a president, but very nearly an American apotheosis. The Gipper as Sun King."
It is this mythogenic quality of Reagan that continues to attract attention. "Partly by an accident of timing, partly by a simple genius of his being, Reagan managed to return to Americans something extremely precious to them: a sense of their own virtue. Reagan -- completely American, uncomplicated, forward-looking, honest, self-deprecating -- became American innocence in a 73-year-old body."
It was never unanimous, though of course Reagan won in 49 states, losing to Mondale only Mondale's home state of Minnesota. This loss recalled a quip by historian-journalist Raymond Moley, who began his official life as a confidant of the young president Franklin D. Roosevelt. He stayed on the scene for many years after his defection from the New Deal, always proffering his views on political developments, sometimes with acid humor. When the pedestrian Estes Kefauver upset the witty Adlai Stevenson in the 1956 presidential primary in Minnesota, Moley cracked, "Did you ever try to tell a joke in Minneapolis?" That witticism perfectly applied to Reagan vs. Mondale in 1984.
The evolving understanding of Reagan was hugely affected by the publication of his letters. There was not a trace of sham in those thousands of letters, written to motley people who had engaged his interest or his concern, or who had aroused his curiosity. The letters revealed a man whose concern was always for others, and whose intelligence was literate and active. His eyes might have closed while the Pope was speaking to him, but such moments had no historical hangover. No gaucheries on any scale were traceable to lapses of attention or even of memory.
One regrets that Reeves is too resolute in his commitment as a backbencher on the other side to indulge the buoyancy of the Reagan years, honestly and industriously though he surveys them. Morrow, addressing many themes and many people in his book, never goes overboard, but he senses what it is that moved so many people to act so decisively on the one occasion -- 1984 -- when Reagan was waiting for a national plebiscite after four years in the White House.
NEW YORK, FEBRUARY 14
Our love affair with democracy is here and there unrequited. Sixty years ago the essayist Albert Jay Nock remarked that if you freeze a frame on a member of the American clerisy you will find his mouth open having uttered the syllables "demo." In the second frame, he'll have closed his mouth on the syllables "cracy." In a desperate attempt retroactively to challenge the Palestinian election of January 25, we are now contending that it was not really pure democracy, because voters were confused by the presence of third-party candidates and partnerships, all of which had the effect of augmenting the Hamas vote, etc. etc. etc.
But the hard fact of the matter is that next Saturday, the new government of the Palestinian Authority (PA) will take charge, and the majority of votes in that legislature will be those of Hamas. This is an event of colossal importance in the sinuous path toward livable arrangements in the Near East. Something has to happen. Either Hamas has to be castrated, or it has to be stopped. By military action? God save us, the U.S. and Israel have come up with a military solution in drag.
The idea is to starve the PA into undoing the results of its election by declining frontier payments from Israel (they yield about $55 million a month). Simultaneously, you suspend all U.S. contributions to the PA, leaving it with a mere $100,000 in monthly cash from supporters abroad. In a matter of weeks, the Palestinians would not be able to pay the salaries of 140,000 employees critical to the maintenance of civil order.
Where do we go from there?
Well, it just happens that the French and the Russians (they make up two actors in the quartet of which the U.S. and the U.N. are members) hove in over the weekend. The rule had been, since the January election, that Hamas would need to reform its charter, which calls for the elimination of Israel. Something less than that, say the French and the Russians: If Hamas will just agree to enter into conversation with the West, without exactly renouncing its pledge to destroy Israel, that will be enough for a start. What we need is jaw jaw, to avert wah wah, as Churchill counseled in 1954.
The hulking monster in the background of all this is Iran. The mullahs there could finance the basic requirements of a Hamas-dominated PA with one day's pumping of oil. This development truly horrifies the diplomats. The annexation of Hamas's program by the implacably hell-bent Iran would be a long step in the realization of nightmare.
And with only Iraq and Jordan in between, we are in Egypt. And there, lively in the political womb, is a bumptious child bursting to celebrate the birth of democracy in Egypt.
We are dealing with a movement that decades ago was illegalized by the Egyptian government. But the Muslim Brotherhood persisted and in the parliamentary election last fall showed their gathering strength. Accordingly, on the same weekend in which Hamas faced economic ostracism, Mubarak announced a two-year postponement of scheduled local elections. This was a visible sign of fright, that democracy was on the move, and that a religious organization which has engaged in violent activities threatens the plans of Mubarak to hand Egypt over to his son. Observers with minimal liberal sensibilities welcome most moves against Mubarak, but not any move against him, be- cause he has stayed outside the clutches of the Islamic totalists and because his country was the first Mideast power to acknowledge Israeli independence. The prospect of the Muslim Brotherhood overwhelming Egypt and collaborating with the mullahs' Iran reminds us of the risks that democracy can bring.
It is a bitter pill to swallow, to see the U.S. and Israel forthrightly attempting to subvert democracy in Palestine. But the first law in this sermon is that democracy's fruits sometimes need either to be stillborn or else to be resisted.
NEW YORK, FEBRUARY 17
This commentator rations himself to only one prediction every 15 years. Mine now is that there is going to be a devastating backlash in the months and years ahead in the matter of Cheney and the quail shoot.
Some critics of the administration are arguing as if Iraq were a subsidiary concern. What has been brought forth in the plains of Texas is the venal character of the vice president of the United States.
One columnist for the New York Times headlined his column, "Mr. Vice President, It's Time to Go." Resign, "for the sake of the country and" -- one inhales the purity of the writer's motives -- "for the sake of the Bush administration."
Now that gentleman's concern for the well-being of the Bush administration is on the level of his concern for the quail that Mr. Cheney did or did not kill (this is the only detail of the event unexplored by the historians). Why did the critic want Mr. Cheney to resign? Because "Mr. Cheney is arrogant, defiant and sometimes blatantly vulgar." Oh? Yes -- the critic arrived with documentation in hand: "He once told Sen. Patrick Leahy to perform a crude act upon himself." You do not say! Well, that's the kind of thing one would expect from somebody who goes about crippling his friends while ostensibly aiming only at quail.
It is to the credit of the newspaper of record that a few pages before the call for the resignation of Mr. Cheney, a careful reporter, Mr. Ralph Blumenthal, gave a detailed account of what had happened on Saturday at the Armstrong ranch.
Who all was there? Well, Pamela Pitzer Willeford, ambassador to Switzerland and Liechtenstein, and her husband, the hostess, Katharine Armstrong, and her sister and her husband. Also Nancy Negley, an art philanthropist, Ben Love, a West Texas rancher, and the victim, Harry Whittington, a 78-year-old lawyer, and his wife. Also several outriders, whose duty was to flush the birds. Also a dozen American pointers and Labrador retrievers. Close to 5:30 p.m., the two shooting groups had bagged about 40 quail each, and were working now on the last covey.
About 100 yards away from the jeep carrying the hostess and her sister, "Mr. Cheney, Mr. Whittington, and Ms. Willeford were walking in a line in a low spot on gently sloping ground. After Mr. Whittington bagged his birds he dropped out of sight, along with one of Ms. Armstrong's bird dogs." (Her name -- not originally disclosed to the press -- is "Gertie.") "Then, suddenly, he was in a dip about 30 yards away against the sun just as Mr. Cheney fired a blast from his Italian-made 28-gauge Perazzi shotgun." That is when Mr. Whittington "caught the spray of birdshot on the right side of his face, neck, and chest."
Mr. Cheney is recorded as having said, "Harry, I had no idea you were there!" The exclamation point is mine, and will offend only those who refuse to believe that Mr. Cheney was startled at finding that his friend stood in a line between him, Gertie, and the setting sun.
We all know what then happened. But the only thing that then happened that seemed to catch national attention was that the party drove not to the nearest newspaper, but to the hospital.
An account was filed with a local newspaper and the doleful news came from the hospital that one pellet had entered the heart of the victim. There is little doubt but that he will survive. Mr. Cheney has said that what blame there is, is Mr. Cheney's. That detail, by the way, is also not fully explored -- conceivably the victim had failed to identify his position when moving forward from the firing line established by hunters moving in parallel.
We can't celebrate a backlash until Mr. W. is back home and well. But here is one observer who predicts that Mr. W. will chuckle over the misadventure, unless, after years of friendship with Mr. Cheney, he only now discovers that he is arrogant, defiant, and that he uses vulgar language.
-- Universal Press Syndicate
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Magazine

Subject: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS & NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); HISTORY (89%); ELECTIONS (79%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (79%); COLD WAR (78%); POLITICAL & SOCIAL IDEOLOGIES (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (76%); COMMUNISM (74%); VOTERS & VOTING (74%); LIBERALISM (73%); WRITERS (73%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (71%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (67%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (66%); FOREIGN POLICY (66%)

Industry: WRITERS (73%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (66%)

Person: RONALD REAGAN (92%)

Geographic: MINNESOTA, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%)

Load-Date: February 27, 2006


End of Document
