



St. Louis Post-Dispatch (Missouri)
December 23, 2004 Thursday
FIVE STAR LATE LIFT EDITION


Copyright 2004 St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Inc.
Section: EDITORIAL; Pg. C09; Jonah Goldberg
Length: 616 words
Byline: By JONAH GOLDBERG Copyright Tribune Media Services
Body


*Reform means liberals will have to embrace FDR-like change once again.
I have some advice for the real small-"c" conservatives and reactionaries in the debate over Social Security reform: Franklin Roosevelt is dead. Get over it.
Let's start with what should be obvious: If the current Social Security system is a good deal, then it's a good deal. If it's a bad deal, then it's a bad deal. Only a moron of ground-shaking proportions would argue that we should rob millions of low- and middle-income (or even, yes, rich) Americans of a better retirement out of respect to Roosevelt's memory.
Now, almost no one rests his whole argument on this legacy thing, but even bringing it up as part of a larger case gives it too much weight. Remember, we're talking about trillions of dollars over the years. These dollars should have moral weight, particularly for liberals, who are constantly looking for new things to spend money on. If loyalty to Roosevelt's memory costs us even a few billion dollars a year, that's a few billion dollars liberals might otherwise be able to spend on health care, school lunches or scholarships.
The notion that Social Security is some kind of secular tithe to the false god of Roosevelt is intellectually and morally offensive. It is dishonest. Of course, liberal mythology about the New Deal legend is, uh, legendary. But what isn't in dispute among scholars is that it was World War II, not the New Deal, that served to pull America out of the Great Depression.
In all the propaganda about Roosevelt, a more salient point conveniently has been lost: It would be entirely in keeping with Roosevelt's legacy to rip apart the Social Security system if there was even a chance it could be improved. The overarching theme of Roosevelt's governing philosophy, constantly touted by virtually his entire Brain Trust, was "experimentalism."
When Raymond Moley, a leading early Brain Truster, was asked to provide a philosophical justification for Roosevelt's approach to government, he cited big-"p" pragmatism. Moley even noted that Roosevelt had studied under William James, the founder of Pragmatism, at Harvard. The historian Eric Goldman wrote of Roosevelt: "He trusted no system except the system of endless experimentation." Roosevelt himself made this point time and time again.
At Oglethorpe University, Roosevelt declared, "this country needs . . . bold, persistent experimentation. It is common sense to take a method and try it: If it fails, admit it frankly and try another." Roosevelt always emphasized that the important thing was to take action first and fix problems later.
Well, here's the problem. Social Security was launched when there were more than 40 workers carrying the costs of each retiree. Today, there are three workers for each Social Security recipient, and we're heading to a 2-1 ratio soon. It sounds to me that the experiment has run its course.
Roosevelt "batted" Social Security farther than most of his ideas. But it would be nice to believe that the man who derided "horse-and-buggy thinking," and who most famously said "the only thing we have to fear is fear itself," would look at all of this fear-mongering about how Social Security is the "third rail" of American politics with disdain.
This is the striking irony of today's liberal opposition to reforming Social Security. Liberals are supposed to embrace change and deride the dogmatic adherence to the past. Pragmatism, in particular, was conceived to serve as an acid for such rigidity. Yet for the past decade or so, liberals have been unable to let go of the past. How strange that "conservatism" is now the party of "bold experimentation," and "liberals" are the horse-and-buggy crowd.
mdl

Notes

 SOCIAL SECURITY 
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: COMMENTARY

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: SOCIAL SECURITY (91%); CONSERVATISM (90%); LIBERALISM (90%); GREAT DEPRESSION (89%); US SOCIAL SECURITY (89%); WORLD WAR II (73%); STUDENT EXPENSES & FINANCING (71%); HISTORY (63%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (59%); COMMENTARY (%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (91%)

Load-Date: December 24, 2004


End of Document
