



St. Petersburg Times (Florida)
January 15, 1989, Sunday, City Edition


Times Publishing Company
Section: BUSINESS; Pg. 1I
Length: 1774 words
Byline: Elizabeth Whitney
Body


Most readers will be surprised, as I was, to learn that Franklin    Roosevelt initially opposed federal deposit insurance.
 
      In fact, on March 8, 1933 at his first press conference as    president, a reporter asked what he thought of proposals for the    federal government to guarantee bank deposits. "We do not wish to make    the United States government liable for the mistakes and errors of    individual banks and put a premium on unsound banking in the future,"    he replied.
 
     As governor of New York he had opposed state deposit insurance    because it had been tried and failed many years before in New York and    many other states.
 
      Now that the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. (FSLIC) is    insolvent in the wake of a record 217 thrift failures last year, and    the still-solvent bank insurer, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp.    (FDIC), nevertheless also presided over a record 221 bank failures last    year, this little piece of history is full of interesting aspects.
 
 The first, of course, is that federal deposit insurance, which    Roosevelt reluctantly signed into law as part of the Banking Act of    1933, became an acclaimed New Deal program for which even Roosevelt's    political enemies gave him credit.
 
     The second is that federal deposit insurance did exactly what its    backers said it would do - it stopped the bank runs cold. Furthermore,    it stopped the national bank panic that had brought the nation's    financial system to the brink of collapse as Roosevelt took office on    March 4, 1933.
 
     The third is that the 1933 opponents of federal deposit guarantees    - the president, the American Bankers Association, Sen. Carter Glass,    chairman of the Senate Banking Committee - also were right, though it    has taken more than half a century to see it.
 
     For decades, of course, the premiums banks and S&Ls paid to their    insurance funds more than covered the costs of failures. But as    failures mounted and funds depleted, we have seen that even the extra    assessments paid by the financial institutions won't be enough to pay    for all the bailouts and liquidations. And we see that ultimately the    government - that is, the taxpayers - are liable.
 
      A fourth aspect concerns "original intent" - an adherence to    what the framers of the Constitution or a particular law had in mind    when they wrote it - something much stressed these days by President    Reagan's conservative judicial appointees.
 
     Here consistent advocates of original intent would have to agree    with President Reagan's economic advisers who recently proposed    reducing the amount of individual accounts covered by deposit insurance    from its present $ 100,000. The first deposit insurance, which went into    effect in June, 1933, set the cap at $ 2,500. The original intent thus    was to protect the life savings of small depositors and, in 1933, 95    percent of all accounts contained less than $ 2,500.
 
 
 For an expert estimate of what $ 2,500 would be in 1989 dollars I    called the Federal Reserve Bank in Atlanta. Fed economists, using the    Gross National Product deflator index, figure today's equivalent of    $ 2,500 would be "between $ 27,000 and $ 28,000," Fed spokesman Larry    Schulz reported. He noted, however, that six months after deposit    insurance was enacted, the cap was raised to $ 5,000. Thus, if $ 5,000    more accurately reflects original intent, then the comparable ceiling    would be about $ 55,000.
 
     Although the Treasury department and congressional leaders promptly    came out against lowering the $ 100,000 limit, the fact that a    prestigious group seriously made the proposal underscores how far    deposit insurance seems to have strayed from the idea of protecting    small savers.
 
     Beyond that, when financial institutions are liquidated, owners of    accounts of more than $ 100,000 in most cases have been reimbursed in    full along with the insured depositors. Furthermore, banks and S&Ls    have promoted the idea - correctly - that people can have considerably    more than $ 100,000 covered by deposit insurance in one institution if    the money is placed in several carefully-structured accounts. The usual    example is a family of husband, wife and two children with    fully-insured accounts totaling $ 1.4-million.
 
     All this comes at a time when a few economists are calling for    actually scrapping deposit insurance and people again are talking about    reforming the U.S. banking system.
 
     So it might be instructive to look at what a financial system in    collapse is like and why a popular new president whose party controlled    both houses of Congress could not keep this nation from enacting      federal deposit guarantees.
 
 Those incredible days   
 
 It is no exaggeration to say that on March 4, 1933, when Roosevelt    took the oath of office, the nation's financial system was collapsing.
 
 Between the stock market crash of October, 1929, to inauguration day 3    1/2 years later, more than 9,000 banks had closed, causing countless    numbers of people to lose their money. Thousands of thrifts also had    folded. All of St. Petersburg's nine banks had closed, leaving the    city's commerce to be carried on largely with scrip. Fed in part by    rumors that Roosevelt planned to devalue the currency, many Americans    had converted their money to foreign currency, gold or gold    certificates.
 
     And so it was that on that March day 43 of the then 48 states had    already declared bank moratoriums - as did Delaware, for instance,    which closed its banks "indefinitely" - or severely restricted their    banks, as did Florida, which limited withdrawals to 5 percent of one's    balance plus $ 10 until March 8.
 
     To make the bank holiday nationwide, therefore, seemed the logical    next step - an action that President Hoover's advisers at the Treasury    department recommended. But Hoover left it to Roosevelt to act.
 
     Despite the bitterness of the campaign, Hoover Treasury Secretary    Ogden Mills and Undersecretary Arthur Ballantine worked through the    night with Roosevelt Treasury Secretary William Woodin and his close    counsel Raymond Moley to hammer out an amazingly well-orchestrated    plan. "We had forgotten to be Republicans or Democrats," Moley would    later recall. "We were just a bunch of men trying to save the banking    system."
 
     But Roosevelt insisted on assurance that a national moratorium    would be legal. He acted under the Trading-with-the-Enemy Act, which    stated that "the President may investigate, regulate or prohibit …    any transactions in foreign exchange, and the export, hoarding, melting    or earmarking of gold or silver coin or bullion or currency."
 
     Roosevelt proclaimed the bank holiday on March 6; presidential    advisers drafted the Emergency Banking Act of 1933 and in a special    session Congress passed it in an amazing 7 1/2 hours.    Life without banks   
 
 Americans lived without banks for about 10 days. A little activity    was permitted: savings banks allowed withdrawals of up to $ 10 and    commercial banks were permitted to make change and finance some    payrolls.
 
     But it wasn't easy, Susan Estabrook Kennedy relates in her book,    The Banking Crisis of 1933: "In some localities unusual items replaced    currency: a pair of trousers paid one man's fare on a Salt Lake City    trolley; a Philadelphia department store permitted customers to charge    streetcar tokens on the credit accounts; 10 bushels of wheat bought a    year's subscription to the Lewiston, Mont. Democrat-News; Alaskan    miners used gold dust for small change; and when an Oklahoma City hotel    agreed to accept payment of guests' bills with "anything we can use in    the coffee shop," the first patron presented a pig.
 
     "… Most Florida tourists remained on vacation, sustained by    postal money orders and $ 50 advances from the American Express Co.    Visitors in Washington, D.C. for the inauguration paid hotel bills by    check - fortunately for some, like the governor of Pennsylvania who    only had 95 cents in his pockets. … Across the nation parents robbed    their children's piggy banks for cash."
 
     But the moratorium was therapeutic. According to analysts of the    period, Charles A. Beard and George H.A. Smith, "the sudden nationwide    holiday performed the same function for the bank panic as may a sharp    slap in the face for a person gripped by unreasoned hysteria."
 
     On March 12 Roosevelt delivered his first "fireside chat",    explaining how examiners were scrutinizing the closed banks' books, and    announcing the reopening schedule for those found solid. The 12 Federal    Reserve banks would reopen the next day. The day after that, Fed member    banks in 250 other cities with recognized clearinghouses would reopen,    then other licensed member banks, then stable state-chartered    non-member banks. But, the President warned, not all banks would    re-open - and indeed about 4,000 of the nation's nearly 18,000 banks    never did.
 
     When the banks opened the next day as promised, currency deposits    greatly exceeded withdrawals.
 
 The people speak   
 
 The bank holiday was a stopgap, paving the way for passage in June of    the Banking Act of 1933. Despite the continued opposition of the    president, the ABA and Sen. Glass, the bill Roosevelt signed included    federal deposit insurance. It was a political necessity - the people    inundated Congress and the President with mail and telegrams demanding    it.
 
     "You'll have to take it, Cap'n, or get more clerks in the Postal    Savings banks," Roosevelt's vice president, Texan John Nance Garner,    told him. "The people who have taken their money out of the banks are    not going to put it back without some guarantee."
 
     The banking act, though, was a great disappointment to the    Socialist Party, which had attracted quite a following in the    Depression, and others who saw the banking collapse as an opportunity    to nationalize the banks and pool their assets into a government-owned    and operated system.
 
     There was clearly a reform of banking, a cushion for the harsher    aspects of capitalism, but not revolution.
 
     Since the passage of federal deposit guarantees, runs on federally    insured banks and S&Ls and nationwide bank panics, once as common as    recessions, have ceased along with all the hardships they inflict. In    attempting to solve today's banking problems we must remember history    and how crucial is the role of public confidence.
 
    

Graphic

 
BLACK AND WHITE PHOTO; COLOR GRAPH; President Franklin Delano Roosevelt; Map shows the growth in deposit insurance from 1933 through 1980
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: BANK FAILURES (90%); BUSINESS NEWS (79%); NEGATIVE BUSINESS NEWS (79%); LEGISLATION (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); BAILOUTS (77%); BANKING & FINANCE ASSOCIATIONS (77%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (77%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (77%); PRESS CONFERENCES (77%); INSOLVENCY & BANKRUPTCY (74%); APPOINTMENTS (73%); ECONOMICS (72%)

Company: FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORP  (83%); FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORP  (83%)

Industry: NAICS524128 OTHER DIRECT INSURANCE (EXCEPT LIFE, HEALTH & MEDICAL) CARRIERS  (83%);  SIC6399 INSURANCE CARRIERS, NEC  (83%); BANK FAILURES (90%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); SAVINGS & LOANS (90%); INSURANCE (78%); SAVINGS INSTITUTIONS (78%); BANKING & FINANCE ASSOCIATIONS (77%); PUBLISHING (58%)

Person: RONALD REAGAN (89%)

Geographic: NEW YORK, USA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%)

Load-Date: November 9, 1992


End of Document
