



In These Times
May 3, 1998


Copyright 1998 Institute for Public Affairs
Section: REVIEWS; Liberalism; Pg.  19
Length: 1706 words
Byline: REVIEWED BY RICK PERLSTEIN
Highlight: Liberalism and its Discontents
By Alan Brinkley
Harvard University Press
372 pages, $ 27.95
 
Body


If you read much on politics, you've noticed the trend: a bushelful of books, all published in the last few years, whose deja-vu covers (The New Majority: Toward a Popular Progressive Politics; Middle Class Dreams: The Politics and Power of the New American Majority) open to reveal interlocking acknowledgments (Robert Borosage, Theda Skocpol, Paul Starr, Ruy Teixeira, Stanley Greenberg, Jeff Faux) and the same nifty little argument--that a politically untapped mass of citizens, burned by turbocharged capitalism, can be won over to a robust program of progressive government activism by pushing the very same rhetorical buttons of home, hearth and happiness exploited so conspicuously by the present Republican putschists.
If you don't read much on politics, you haven't heard of these people. As political interventionists, the New Majoritarians are washouts: They have yet to produce a candidate for national office, let alone realign the Democratic party to their view of things. Part of the reason is simple politics: No one with power right now pays a whit of attention to anything left of the Democratic Leadership Council. Partly, though, it's their own doing. Consider their tacit battle cry: "We're right! Just look at the numbers!"
Numbers, schnumbers. Great realignments of political power are never effected in a mass electoral democracy without tapping some pretty elemental passions within the electorate. The New Majoritarians' talk of structural transformations, declining real incomes and the impact of the rights revolution on the Democratic coalition is riveting to those (like me) who twig to that sort of thing, but just doesn't cut it with most voters. They are right. But that's not enough.
All is not lost though. The very sobriety that unsuits them as standard bearers for a populist political charge makes the New Majoritarians outstanding interpreters of today's political scene. They offer, if not shots heard 'round the world, some of the most trenchant and readable political essay-writing to be published in decades. Read them well, and you come away with a fuller sense of what's really going on in America than from any dozen carping culture warriors.
Alan Brinkley of Columbia University is their historian. His essays over the past fifteen years, collected in Liberalism and its Discontents, are learned, calm and artful. Brinkley betrays real indignation throughout--as any unashamed liberal faced with the task of explaining the last 65 years of American history must--but his is a quiet anger. Analyzing Franklin D. Roosevelt's attack on "economic royalists" and "malefactors of great wealth" in his 1937 inaugural address, Brinkley writes: "That language--a language only rarely dominant, and more rarely decisive even within the New Deal itself--has since become almost entirely lost to American politics, even though the problems it attempted to address--the problems associated with highly concentrated economic power and widening disparities of wealth and income--have survived."
This typically New Majoritarian weakness as pamphleteer helps to make Brinkley one of the most trenchant, fair-minded and illuminating historical essayists of his generation, and makes this book indispensable to anyone seeking to understand one of the signal political questions of our age: What is New Deal liberalism, and where did it go?
Legions of critics and boosters once thought they knew. New Deal liberalism was an incoherent mess, collapsing under its own internal contradictions. No one seemed to be a better judge of this than Raymond Moley, who observed the New Deal from the inside as one of FDR's original "brain trusters," and later helped along its demise as a virulently conservative Newsweek columnist. In his 1939 memoir, Moley wrote: "To look upon these programs as the result of a unified plan was to believe that the accumulation of stuffed snakes, baseball pictures, school flags, old tennis shoes, carpenter's tools, geometry books and chemistry sets in a boy's bedroom could have been put there by an interior decorator." To which he might have added: To think the New Deal defensible was to believe the brat would ever clean his room.
Brinkley, however, doesn't think that New Deal liberalism was laid low by its messiness. In his 1995 book, The End of Reform: New Deal Liberalism in Recession and War (and four chapters of this volume), he demonstrates liberalism's unmistakable, fateful coherence. The early New Deal, he argues, was certainly jumbled--mirroring, in part, Roosevelt's own divided soul. Major internal debate--between, for instance, those favoring broad-based government intervention into the economy and those who came to prefer managing it with the light touch of Keynesian fiscal policy, mopping up what privation remained through modest welfare provisions and social insurance--divided the New Deal liberals through Roosevelt's first term. But by 1938, a brutal recession and a hostile Supreme Court scotched the interventionist schemes of the early New Deal--none more ruthlessly than the ones for which Brinkley shows an unfashionable sympathy: state efforts to better coordinate the productive powers of industry and to mobilize the unemployed in wide-ranging public works. From that point on, the liberal position cohered around the Keynes-ian, managerial model. The "economic question" presumed solved, liberals moved on to other worthy pursuits, civil rights pre-eminent among them.
In this new collection, Brinkley abets the argument about liberalism in The End of Reform with a parallel one about its discontents. The "economic question" wasn't solved, he points out, and the liberalism that emerged from the Depression and World War II contained a tragic flaw. The little public investment allowed was either disguised (the military-industrial complex, proof positive that Big Government can heal an ailing economy), explained away (Social Security, which pretends not to be a public investment at all), or ill-conceived (Aid to Families with Dependent Children, which assumed that since able-bodied men could always be able to earn enough to keep their wives at home, the state should provide aid only to families where fathers were absent).
Thus, the liberalism we know evolved into an elegant contraption guaranteed to produce unhappy citizens, be they left, right or in-between. The essays in the second half of Liberalism and Its Discontents include sympathetic and moving case studies of some of the malcontents. We are introduced to discontented liberals--like Allard Lowenstein, who watched, anguished, as liberal idealism was swallowed by the post-1967 New Left, which itself receives a sympathetic portrait; and Richard Hofstadter, who watched, anguished, as the American reform tradition's will was wrecked by McCarthyism. We meet those discontented by liberals--like Oral Roberts, whose followers found Pentecostalism a far more worthy guarantor of prosperity than the federal government. And then there are those discontented by politics entirely--like the two major parties, whose neutered national conventions are the subject of the book's most entertaining chapter.
The essay on Roberts is a masterpiece. According to Brinkley, what the faith healer from Tulsa really ministered to was his flock's middle-class dreams. Roberts came to prominence in the '50s as the voice of those backwoods charismatic Southern Christians who went through World War II, blinked, and found themselves in a cauldron of economic revitalization and cultural change. Roberts became a Professor Henry Higgins of the Pentecostals, schooling these left-behinds in how to make their way in a new world without losing their souls. "At Oral Roberts University," Brinkley reports, "aerobic weight-loss programs were required, and the chronically obese could be expelled. Women were encouraged to wear makeup and fashionable clothes." They would go forth and win the secularized suburbs for Jesus--though Brinkley wonders whether the secularized suburbs didn't end up winning them. Around the time he published his 1989 book How I Learned Jesus Was Not Poor, Roberts purged the folk associations of his flock altogether by becoming a Methodist.
Of course, winning those souls left behind by modernity for the middle class was FDR's goal as well. How did millions of people come to find preachers more worthy guarantors of pros- perity than politicians? Brinkley approaches the question only obliquely. Though he led the way among historians in insisting that the American Right should be a serious object of scholarly attention with his 1983 volume Voices of Protest: Huey Long, Father Coughlin, and the Great Depression, he can't really be considered an expert on postwar conservatism. (He even misspells the name of its doyenne, Phyllis Schlafly.) Indeed, Brinkley the historian of New Deal America raises looming questions that Brinkley the essayist of postwar America does not even recognize. If the New Deal left behind as its legacy a "weak and embattled" state, then why did so many Americans come to experience it as a looming Leviathan? And, if the New Deal lavished so much productive attention on the region that would come to be called "the Sunbelt," why was so much of the reaction centered there?
I have some ideas, which I'll keep a trade secret for now. But I'll tell you this: I wouldn't be able to argue what I plan to argue in my own book on the end of New Deal liberalism without Alan Brinkley's insights on its rise. What's more, two of the most promising forthcoming studies on the subject--Lisa McGirr on Orange County conservatism and Matthew Dalleck on Ronald Reagan's 1966 gubernatorial race--owe Brinkley a more direct debt: Both began as Columbia University dissertations under his supervision.
Neither Brinkley nor his students will ever send the masses to the barricades. They will only give us the kind of history worth reading while we wait and work for the next new majority to arise. In the Era of Gingrich, that may not be achievement enough. But in the Age of Gossip, it will have to do.
*
Rick Perlstein, a contributing editor of Lingua Franca, is writing a book about the 1964 Barry Goldwater campaign.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: ELECTIONS & POLITICS (90%); LIBERALISM (90%); POLITICAL & SOCIAL IDEOLOGIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); TRENDS (89%); HISTORY (84%); POPULISM (79%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (79%); DEMOCRACIES (78%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (77%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%)

Company: COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS  (51%); COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY PRESS  (51%);    HARVARD UNIVERSITY   (59%);  HARVARD UNIVERSITY  (59%)

Organization: HARVARD UNIVERSITY   (59%);  HARVARD UNIVERSITY  (59%)

Industry: BOOK PUBLISHING (78%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: May 18, 1998


End of Document
