



The Courier Mail (Australia)
December 27, 2008 Saturday
1 - First with the news Edition


Copyright 2008 Nationwide News Pty Limited All Rights Reserved
Section: FEATURES; Pg. 13
Length: 805 words
Byline: Dennis Atkins
Body


IT'S said every politician has at least one good speech in them, which means the next two years could be particularly long and painful.
Labor's Kevin Rudd, pictured, tossed up his star turn as a speech-maker on the first sitting day of Parliament, with an official apology to the Stolen Generations.
It was a self-penned and eloquent address which in full ran to 3892 words but had at its heart a 361-word sorry motion that captured a sentiment long searching for a voice.
Its brevity -- just 90 words longer than Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg Address -- confirms the rule that political oration should be short with every word urgently needed and the rest edited out.
At year's end the Prime Minister tossed up the other side of his speech-making character, with a clunky address to special forces in the deadly Afghan badlands.
The speech's forced blokiness -- ``you really know your shit'', ``you blokes who look really ugly'' and ``bugger that for a joke'' -- harked back to one of Rudd's more frenzied periods of leadership aspiration when he replaced his policy-dense small-talk with lurid discussions of everyone's sex lives.
Whenever someone tells Rudd he's sounding too nerdish he lays on the ``common touch'' with gusto. It's never pretty.
For comparison with Rudd's Afghan ramblings, here's Paul Keating at the Australian War Memorial's Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in 1993. What it didn't say about war and the military courage and political stupidity that usually goes with it wasn't worth saying.
``Because the Great War was a mad, brutal, awful struggle, distinguished more often than not by military and political incompetence; because the waste of human life was so terrible that some said victory was scarcely discernible from defeat; and because the war which was supposed to end all wars in fact sowed the seeds of a second even more terrible war -- we might think this Unknown Soldier died in vain,'' Keating said.
``But, in honouring our war dead, as we always have and as we do today, we declare that this is not true. For out of the war came a lesson which transcended the horror and tragedy and the inexcusable folly. It was a lesson about ordinary people and the lesson was that they were not ordinary.
``On all sides they were the heroes of that war; not the generals and the politicians but the soldiers and sailors and nurses -- those who taught us to endure hardship, to show courage, to be bold as well as resilient, to believe in ourselves, to stick together.''
Written by Don Watson, it stands with the best prime ministerial speeches.
Rudd, who like John Howard prefers to write or finish off his speeches himself, has hired a new wordsmith, Melbourne journalist and former London correspondent James Button, son of Hawke government minister the late John Button.
If he can bring some clarity and human connection to Rudd's speeches Button will do us all a favour. But it can be a frustrating and disappointing business when the boss puts his own stamp on an address.
Overall Rudd has had a remarkably successful year. In many respects it's been the best politically managed freshman year for any government in half a century, with no scandals engulfing the ministry and no stand-out failures in the ranks.
Rudd, his Deputy Julia Gillard and Treasurer Wayne Swan make up possibly the hardest-working and most able leadership trio the country has seen. They are also refreshingly free of ideology and prejudice.
And it's hard to think of a year when so much has been turned on its head. We began with a war on inflation and an imperative for large budget surpluses and finish with catastrophic price falls and a ``spend, spend, spend'' attitude that verges on nervous frenzy.
Labor has spent all but small change from the $21.7 billion surplus and there's bound to be another big stimulus package before the May Budget.
If it has a ``making it up as we go along'' feel, this approach is nothing new in politics. A book being released in the US next month traces the first 100 days of the presidency of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who took over in Washington at the height of the Great Depression.
In a preview of his book New York Times journalist Adam Cohen quotes Roosevelt's top aide Raymond Moley talking about how the New Deal rescue plan was put together.
``To look upon these policies as the result of a unified plan was to believe that the accumulation of stuffed snakes, baseball pictures, school flags, old tennis shoes, carpenter's tools, geometry books, and chemistry sets in a boy's bedroom could have been put there by an interior decorator," said Moley.
It paints a picture that's familiar in Canberra -- and in most capitals where governments are grappling with once-in-a-century challenges.
Happy New Year to you all. Let's hope it's not as bad as some experts suggest.

Swan's year P73
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Journal Code: CML

Subject: ELECTIONS & POLITICS (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); NEGATIVE POLITICAL NEWS (78%); POLITICS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%)

Industry: ARMED FORCES (89%)

Person: KEVIN RUDD (79%)

Load-Date: December 26, 2008


End of Document
