



The Toronto Star
April 5, 2009 Sunday


Copyright 2009 Toronto Star Newspapers, Ltd.
Section: OPINION; Pg. A17
Length: 995 words
Body


Liberal Leader Michael Ignatieff has called for a "thinkers conference" to help set a new policy course for the Liberal party.
To most observers, this recalls the 1960 Kingston conference that helped provide the Lester Pearson minority governments of 1963-68 with fresh ideas. But there is an even earlier historical precedent that is worth considering: the first (and last) Liberal summer conference at Port Hope in 1933.
There are eerie parallels between 1933 and 2009. A scandal-plagued Liberal government had been displaced three years earlier by the Conservatives led by a prime minister from Calgary. A global economic collapse had engulfed Canada. In the United States, a discredited Republican administration had just been replaced by a new Democratic administration under a charismatic leader who pledged to use the federal government to put America back to work and restore prosperity.
Canadian politics suddenly seemed stale and stodgy by comparison, and Canadian parties thin on ideas to combat the Great Depression. Prime Minister R.B. Bennett was a strong, even autocratic, leader, but mired in outmoded conservative shibboleths about the economy. Yet in 1935, Bennett, facing an imminent election, announced his own "New Deal" in a series of radio speeches that represented an abrupt philosophical turnaround. Similarly, faced with the possibility of defeat in Parliament, Stephen Harper's Conservatives turned their complacently conservative November 2008 economic statement on its head with the January budget's economic stimulus based on deficit financing.
How do Liberals respond when Conservatives suddenly move to the centre? In the 1930s, the leader of the opposition, Mackenzie King, was far more interested in raising campaign funds and getting back into power than in considering new ideas about what to do about the crisis.
Nevertheless, the head of the National Liberal Federation, Vincent Massey, pushed for an annual conference that would bring together people from various fields to thrash out new thinking on the pressing issues of the day. This task was particularly urgent for the Liberals. The CCF (the predecessor of today's NDP), which held its founding convention in the summer of 1933, was challenging the Liberals from the left.
Despite King's opposition, the conference did go ahead, but financed out of Massey's own ample pockets after King vetoed the use of party funds. In early September 1933, some 300 people gathered for a week to listen to more than two dozen speakers. Not surprisingly, economic issues predominated. Among the speakers were some prominent Canadians from business, journalism and the universities. A key adviser to U.S. president Franklin Roosevelt, Raymond Moley, explained New Deal thinking. The speeches and a summary of the discussions were compiled in book form as The Liberal Way, published later that same year.
The Liberal Way was hardly radical. While recognizing that the free market had failed in important ways, there was little appetite for radically overhauling the economic system. There was, however, a sense that liberalism had to steer a course away from laissez-faire capitalism. That could include a stronger role for the state both in regulating the market and in directly stimulating the depressed economy.
Even mild calls for change made a negative impression on King, who sneered in his diary at the "amateurish" contributions of academics. Moley's presentation on the New Deal made King's "blood run cold." King believed that policy should be made by the parliamentary caucus, and by the leader himself, not by independent minds free from party discipline. King quickly put a stop to Liberal policy conferences and forced Massey to redirect his financial contributions to the coming election campaign.
As it turned out, few voters in 1935 believed in Bennett's deathbed conversion to reform, and the Liberals were returned to government. Back in office, King showed no interest in any new thinking about the Great Depression. By contrast with the relatively inventive New Deal, the 1935-1940 King government was determined to stand pat. Liberal budgets were deeply conservative in their commitment to reducing government spending, damping down recovery rather than encouraging it.
It was only the pressures of World War II and a rising CCF challenge at the end of the war that forced the King governments of the 1940s to adopt what amounted to Keynesian fiscal policies and an enhanced economic role for the federal government. The late 1930s were an era of wasted opportunities for the Liberals: if they had actually listened to some of the ideas brought forward at Port Hope, they might at least have made an earlier start.
What lessons can be drawn for today?
Left to their own devices, political parties are poor vehicles for policy innovation. King showed that economic crisis can vault an opposition party into power without providing it with any ideas about dealing with that crisis. The Liberals today have pushed the Conservatives toward the centre but their daily barrage of negative criticism, however justified, does not add up to a coherent alternative.
Ignatieff, unlike King, appears favourably disposed to inviting ideas from outside the party as well as within. Today the Internet offers avenues for expanded public participation in policy-making that go beyond the relatively small elite gatherings at Port Hope or even Kingston, and the Liberal party is beginning to explore these avenues. But while Internet debates, as well as town hall meetings around the country, are useful, they have limits, often being too diffuse and unfocused.
There is no substitute for bringing people with ideas together to spark innovative thinking. The proposal for a thinkers conference should not be lost amid electoral opportunism.
Reg Whitaker, Distinguished Research Professor Emeritus at York University, is the author of The Government Party about the Liberals in the King and St. Laurent eras.

Graphic

 
 STAR FILE PHOTOS EERIE PARALLELS: William Lyon Mackenzie King, top left, confronted R.B. Bennett, a Conservative prime minister from Calgary, during a period of economic crisis, just as current Liberal Leader Michael Ignatieff faces Prime Minister Stephen Harper, another Calgary Conservative.
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Document-Type: COLUMN

Publication-Type: NEWSPAPER

Subject: CONSERVATISM (90%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (90%); ECONOMIC DECLINE (90%); ECONOMIC NEWS (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); BUSINESS NEWS (89%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (89%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (89%); POLITICS (89%); LIBERALISM (79%); REPORTS, REVIEWS & SECTIONS (79%); VETO (79%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (78%); US ECONOMIC STIMULUS PLAN 2008-2009 (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); GREAT DEPRESSION (76%); NEGATIVE PERSONAL NEWS (76%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (75%); ECONOMIC DEPRESSION (75%); NEGATIVE ECONOMIC NEWS (75%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (75%); JOURNALISM (73%); GOVERNMENT ADVISORS & MINISTERS (72%); NEGATIVE MISC NEWS (70%); ECONOMIC STIMULUS (66%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%)

Industry: BUDGETS (75%); NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING (73%)

Person: STEPHEN HARPER (79%)

Geographic: CALGARY, AB, CANADA (72%); ALBERTA, CANADA (58%); CANADA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%)

Load-Date: April 5, 2009


End of Document
