

                                                                                                         Page 1 of 3
                                              LETTERS TO THE EDITOR




                                           LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
                                                Crain's Chicago Business
                                                  May 3, 2004, Monday



Copyright 2004 Crain Communications Inc.

Section: Pg. 10
Crain's April 26 editorial, Tinker with a broken tax system? No, let's fix it'' was right on the mark.

Illinois' tax system has been broken for some time. We just didn't notice. During the past couple of years, the reality
of the inadequacy of the Illinois tax system has become painfully evident. Unfortunately, several politicians and
editorial pages have proclaimed that the only cure is to cut spending. Others would lead us to believe that we can
borrow our way out of the hole. (My Dad used to tell me that when I found myself in a hole, the first thing I should do
is stop digging!)

While we can all point to some state spending we believe of dubious value, by and large, Illinois lawmakers have
not been spendthrifts.

Are local school districts in financial distress because the Legislature has showered money on them? Is the reason
that part of our child welfare system is under court order to reduce caseloads because the Department of Children
and Family Services has too much money? Is the reason some nursing home operators have either closed or face
bankruptcy because of the state's timely and excessive Medicaid reimbursements? Is Illinois the biggest pension
deadbeat'' in the nation because of the extravagant, on-time state payments into the system?

The U.S. Census Bureau reports that in 2001, Illinois had the fewest state employees per total population of any of
the 50 states. Reportedly, state payroll has dropped another 10,000 persons in the past two years. Do we just have
too many freeloaders on the state payroll?

I think I see a pattern in these facts. Our tax system just isn't up to the task of meeting our real needs. Hopefully,
influential editorial pages such as Crain's will help our lawmakers find the courage to stop wrangling over fees'' and
caps'' and fix the total system for all of us.

John Terwilliger

Charleston

Power's potential

U.S. Rep. William O. Lipin-ski's proposal to consolidate Metra and Pace, revamp the Regional Transportation
Authority (RTA) board and make the RTA chairman a true CEO has received mixed reviews in the local media,
including Crain's ( Lipinski is right on RTA but wrong on streetcar,'' April 14).

                                                                                                           Page 2 of 3
                                              LETTERS TO THE EDITOR

Essentially, the critics fear potential abuse of power by a larger, more centralized transit agency, while endorsing
the idea of a simplified agency able to sell a single pass good for trips on all buses and trains.

A simplified fare card should not be seen as the sole reason for agency consolidation. Ticketing is not the real
problem. The real problem is that urgently needed projects are not getting built. A single mass transit organization
with a single empowered chief executive officer will enable the Chicago region to accomplish with mass transit what
the legendary Robert Moses accomplished in New York with highways, parks and bridges: Get things done.''

Anyone who has read Robert Caro's critical 1974 biography of Mr. Moses, The Power Broker,'' will note the
potential for abuse in a powerful position.

But Mr. Caro points out that potential abuse of power must be weighed against the civic and economic
impoverishment that follows the failure to apply power where it is needed. He quotes FDR brain-truster Raymond
Moley's observation that from the pyramids of Egypt, the rebuilding of Rome after Nero's fire, to the creation of the
great medieval cathedrals . . . all great public works have been somehow associated with autocratic power.''

Mr. Moley went so far to claim that pure democracy has neither the imagination, nor the energy, nor the disciplined
mentality to create major improvements.''

I hope Mr. Moley was wrong about democracy. I hope our system of government will rally itself to resume building
large public works while managing the perils of excessive power.

There is no better place to make this attempt than Chicago, where a booming, 21st-century economy is trying to
force unprecedented volumes of people and goods through a 1950s highway system, a 1970s airport system and a
19th-century railroad network and transit infrastructure. If a transportation czar'' gets us to a solution faster than the
current fragmented decision-making structure, more power to him.

James E. Coston

Managing partner

Coston Fioretti & Lichtman

Chicago

No relation

There have been multiple stories over the past year or so about Near North National Group and the legal difficulties
encountered by Michael Segal.

Since Segal Co. has received some questions about whether we are or have been connected to this individual, we
want to assure Crain's readers that Near North's Michael Segal has never had a relationship to Segal Co. and is not
related to anyone at Segal Co.

Mary L. Feldman

Senior vice-president

Segal Co.

New York



 
