



USNEWS.com
April 9, 2015 Thursday


Copyright 2015 U.S. News & World Report All Rights Reserved
Section: NEWS; Vol.; No.
Length: 2048 words
Byline: U.S. News Staff
Highlight: A look at the start of Franklin Delano Roosevelt's presidency and his impact.
Body


This article originally appeared in U.S. News & World Report on Oct. 25, 1993.
By Lewis Lord 
It had happened in Russia only 15 years before, and mere days had passed since it occurred in Germany. Now, on March 4, 1933, fears abounded that chaos and totalitarianism soon would strike the United States of America. Herbert Hoover awoke that cold, dreary Saturday, his final morning in the White House, to word that Illinois and New York had joined a long list of states where all the banks had ceased to function. "We are at the end of our string," the president-reject conceded. "There is nothing more we can do." 
 What, indeed, could anyone do to curb the Great Depression, then in its fourth grim year? Working women could help, several women's magazines suggested, by giving men their jobs. Deport all aliens so more paychecks can go to real Americans, counseled Texas's Rep. Martin Dies. Ship America's 12 million blacks to Africa, proposed Theodore Bilbo, Mississippi's soon-to-be senator. A retired major recommended killing old people "of no use to themselves or anyone else." John Dewey, the educator, favored the death of something less personal. "Capitalism," he said, "must be destroyed." 
 The hapless Hoover had waited in vain for capitalism to cure itself, with no help from Washington. "Economic wounds," he said, "must be healed by the action of the cells of the economic body -- the producers and consumers themselves." But producers quit producing and consumers stopped consuming. Industries operated at less than half their 1929 capacity, and probably a third of the work force was out of work. Despair ruled the land. People slept in sewer pipes in Oakland and hunted food in garbage dumps in Chicago. When a puny child in Appalachia complained of being hungry, her teacher told her to go home and eat. "I can't," the girl replied. "It's my sister's turn to eat." 
 Hoover's secretary of war, bracing for an Inauguration Day revolt by "reds and possible Communists," massed troops near big cities. East Coast businessmen plotted ways to get out of town in case the jobless cut telephone lines and barricaded highways. The chief of the American Farm Bureau Federation warned of a coming "revolution in the countryside," while Alf Landon, the Republican governor of Kansas, declared "the iron hand of a national dictator" preferable to a paralyzed economy. Franklin D. Roosevelt, the president-elect, sensed what was at stake. A friend told him that if he succeeded, he would go down in history as the greatest president ever and that if he failed, he would be known as the worst. "If I fail," Roosevelt replied, "I shall be the last one." 
 That Saturday, millions turned on their Philcos and Zeniths to hear Roosevelt's answer to calamity. For months, the 51-year-old New York governor had promised little except a vague "new deal for the American people," especially "the forgotten man at the bottom of the economic pyramid." Now, in his inaugural address, the new president's voice rang out: "This great nation will endure as it has endured, will revive and will prosper. So, first of all, let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself." The crowd stood almost silent in the cold wind. "This nation asks for action, and action now." For the first time since 1929, the capital heard genuine cheers. "We must act, and act quickly." The paraplegic president left the applauding throng like a cocky prizefighter, shaking his hands over his head. Wrote Will Rogers: "If he burned down the Capitol, we would cheer and say, 'Well, we at least got a fire started.' " 
 Roosevelt did not torch the Capitol, as Adolf Hitler's Nazis had done with Berlin's Reichstag only days earlier. Nor did he seek dictatorial power or set people against people as Hitler was doing. Instead, as 1933 unfolded, this one man who seemed to understand what Americans had in common much better than they themselves had ever known would pull together the nation's degraded down and outs and scared-as-hell upper crust. He would lift up a generation of his countrymen and set back on course a national dream that, though battered and transformed, has endured ever since. "We have had our revolution," Collier's magazine would observe that year, "and we like it." 
 was set immediately. FDR chose as his first New Deal patient the banks, most of them reeling from hemorrhages of deposits. Rather than nationalize the system, as Germany did, he closed every bank in the land until examiners ruled them sound. On his eighth day in office, he told a national radio audience why the shutdown was necessary, explaining the crisis so well, Will Rogers said, that even bankers could understand it. Such "fireside chats" would come to represent something new, a bond across the airwaves between the leader and the people, one that in some countries would be a force for evil. In America, for the most part, the tie would reinforce democracy. That week, 3 of every 4 banks reopened. Banks were safe, people concluded, because FDR said so. Cash stashed under mattresses suddenly became bank deposits, and the stock market jumped 15 percent. Raymond Moley, then a top Roosevelt aide, would later become one of his harshest critics, but his assessment of what happened that March never changed: "Capitalism was saved in eight days." 
 It was saved by a distinctively American form of pragmatic planning. All that spring, lights burned late in the White House as Moley and other "Brain Trusters" looked for ways to rescue farmers, revive industries and feed the hungry. "Take a method and try it," Roosevelt urged. "If it fails, try another. But above all, try something." He was asked what he would say when people questioned the ideology behind the Tennessee Valley Authority, a massive public-power scheme some saw as creeping socialism. "I'll tell them it's neither fish nor fowl," he laughed, "but whatever it is, it will taste awfully good to the people of the Tennessee Valley." Some plans fell short, including one aimed at easing hunger in the long run. "People don't eat in the long run," snapped Harry Hopkins, in charge of relief. "They eat every day." 
 An entirely different way of thinking about American government emerged, with a blizzard of programs known by initials: C. Everyone seemed to pitch in. For the NRA, or National Recovery Act, the presidents of General Motors and General Electric huddled with labor bosses to create "codes" telling businesses how much to charge customers and pay workers. Sears, Roebuck rescinded a 10 percent pay cut, and dozens of firms raised wages. Pratfalls abounded. "What Is America Up To?" asked a London newspaper after a Jersey City tailor drew 30 days in jail for charging 35 cents to press a suit instead of the 40 cents the NRA's Tailoring Industry Code required. (Two years later, the Supreme Court would kill the NRA, and FDR would try something else.) 
 The WPA, or Works Progress Administration, put 3 million of the jobless to work on roads, parks and buildings. Former businessmen who couldn't afford overalls wore business suits to lay sewer pipes. "I hate to think what would have happened if this work hadn't come," a Montana ditch digger said. "I'd sold or hocked everything. And my kids were hungry. I stood in front of the window of the bake shop and wondered just how long it would be before I got desperate enough to pick up a rock and heave it through that window and grab some bread to take home." 
 During the decade, Roosevelt would become 20th-century America's most loved and most hated public figure. The well-to-do despised him as "that man," the aristocrat who betrayed his class, while Georgia sharecroppers and California pea pickers adorned their shacks with FDR portraits made from news photos glued to cardboard. A reporter quizzed a North Carolina millworker about his enthusiasm for the president: Didn't he realize that FDR's crackpot notions would wreck America? The worker didn't know that, but he did know this: "Roosevelt is the only man we ever had in the White House who would understand that my boss is a son of a bitch." 
 The New Deal's reforms would endure, from Social Security and accessible home mortgages to cheap electricity and a supervised stock market. And early on there would come a sure sign that business was picking up: Executives who had begged the government to do something began complaining that it did too much. But the New Deal would not cure America's economic woes -- to end the Depression, FDR would swap his "Dr. New Deal" hat for a "Dr. Win the War" cap. Only then, during the massive spending for World War II, would unemployment slip below 15 percent. 
 The New Deal's start would prove more vital than its finish. Long before political scientists concluded he had created the modern presidency, long before economists decided he had saved capitalism, long before historians ranked him beside Washington and Lincoln as "great," a man who couldn't walk put America on its feet. Nothing summed up 1933's new mood better than a Walt Disney cartoon that hit the movie screens in uplifting color. When the Three Little Pigs sang "Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf?" few missed the symbolism. 
The Way We Were
Alphabet Soup:The New Deal created 59 new agencies. Growth in federal employees from 1932 to 1936: 46 percent. The agencies included the Federal Theatre Project to produce plays with the help of 3,350 out-of-work actors, and the Federal Writers' Project to compile oral histories and travel guides. Number of commercially published FWP works: 378. 
Domestic Demagogues:Populists like Father Charles Coughlin and Louisiana's Huey Long held great sway. In 1933, Coughlin's weekly radio show won a preference poll against the New York Philharmonic broadcast, 187,000 to 12,000. By 1935, Long's Share-Our-Wealth organization, which backed a $ 2,000-a-year guaranteed income, had 7 million members. Long was assassinated that year. 
Opening the Floodgates: The 18th Amendment to the Constitution -- enacted in 1920 to outlaw the sale of beverages with more than 0.5 percent alcohol -- was repealed in 1933. During the era, a new subculture arose, with women and men drinking together in "speakeasies." In 1930, members of the Women's Organization for National Prohibition Reform: 60,000 
Radio Days:The '30s were the "Golden Age of Radio." U.S. homes with radios in 1920: 500,000; in 1930: 14 million. Commercial stations that began in the '30s: 212. Radio advertising revenues in 1930: $ 40 million; in 1935: $ 112 million. In October 1938, 6 million heard Orson Welles's broadcast of "War of the Worlds." Many thought the Martian invasion was real, setting off panic in the New York City area. 
Big Screens and Small:The Depression arrived almost simultaneously with the "talkies." Weekly U.S. moviegoers, 1930: 115 million; U.S. population: 122 million. U.S. feature films in the '30s: 5,009; in the '80s: 3,774. The most eagerly awaited film of the decade was 1939's Gone With the Wind. Meanwhile, by 1938, there were still only 20,000 television sets in service in New York City. 
Re-election Roundup:In the 1936 presidential election, FDR defeated Republican Alf Landon by a landslide, with 61 percent of the popular vote. Still, that same year, Adolf Hitler did somewhat better in a vote of confidence from the German people. Share of votes for Hitler as fuhrer in 1936: 99 percent. Other political parties allowed to compete in Germany that year: zero. 
Peace in Our Time: On Sept. 30, 1938, British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain met Hitler in Munich in hopes of averting war and agreed that Germany could annex Czechoslovakia's Sudetenland. Number of days before Hitler broke the Anglo-German nonaggression agreement by invading Poland: 336; number of days after invasion Chamberlain served as prime minister: 219. 
The Long March:In October 1934, Mao Zedong's Red Army began a yearlong, 6,000-mile trek to escape government forces and establish itself throughout China, crossing 24 rivers and 18 mountain ranges, and occupying 62 cities. Troops who began the march: 100,000; who survived: 33,000. After the march, Mao's forces devised communist strategies and, in 1949, took over China. 

Graphic

 
Picture, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt addresses the nation over a national radio hook-up on Aug. 23, 1938, while Eleanor Roosevelt and the president's mother, Sara, watch from the other side of the fireplace., Keystone/Getty Images
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Web Publication

Subject: GOVERNORS (89%); CONSUMERS (86%); COMMUNISM (78%); GREAT DEPRESSION (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); POLITICAL & SOCIAL IDEOLOGIES (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); WOMEN (78%); WOMEN WORKERS (78%); DICTATORSHIPS (77%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (77%); TYPES OF GOVERNMENT (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (76%); ECONOMIC DEPRESSION (74%); DEATH & DYING (73%); LABOR FORCE (73%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (73%); WASTE MANAGEMENT INDUSTRY (68%); SENIOR CITIZENS (66%); WAR & CONFLICT (62%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (60%); LANDFILLS (50%)

Company:  U S NEWS & WORLD REPORT INC (91%)

Industry: SIC2721 PERIODICALS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (91%); WASTE MANAGEMENT INDUSTRY (68%); LANDFILLS (50%)

Geographic: CHICAGO, IL, USA (72%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%); KANSAS, USA (79%); UNITED STATES (95%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); GERMANY (78%)

Load-Date: April 10, 2015


End of Document
