



The San Diego Union-Tribune
July 6, 1990 Friday


Copyright 1990 The San Diego Union-Tribune
Section: LIFESTYLE; Pg. C-13
Length: 632 words
Byline: Don Freeman
Body


Some time before Roger Moore assumed the role of master spy James Bond, I became a booster on his behalf.
This goes back to an interview on the set of a cherished series called "Maverick," a satire of television westerns. Moore, this urbane Britisher, had ventured across the pond to essay the role of the cousin of Bret Maverick, played by James Garner. I believe Moore's name here was Beau Maverick. Whatever his handle, the man was jovial to a visiting journalist.
In an interview punctuated with laughter, Moore passed along a theory of his which, to my knowledge, had never previously been forwarded by any historian of the American West. "Now it is clear to me why you Americans had a Wild West," Moore said in those clipped British tones of his.
"It is because of tight pants and tight boots.
Such as what I am wearing, at this very moment, to my extreme discomfort." He paused for the import of his thesis to sink in. "Wearing tight pants and tight boots," Moore went on, "made the cowboys fearfully ill-tempered, and that, in point of fact, is why they got plastered drinking rotgut in saloons, listening to the dreadful music of a piano player with the touch of a hippopotamus.
Tight pants and tight boots led to gunfights and, altogether, unpleasantness on all sides." Roger grinned.
"What do you think of my theory?" "Brilliant," I said. And now here on William F. Buckley's "Firing Line" is Roger Moore, dressed to the nines.
He's being interviewed by Bill Buckley, equally well-garbed, a portrait in unstressed elegance with his tie casually tied in the manner that I have tried, with a conspicuous lack of success, to emulate. The program, scheduled tomorrow at 4:30 p.m. on KPBS-TV, dwells on the following issue: "Does a Politician Have to Be a Good Actor?" "To what extent," Buckley said, "is it true that anybody who aspires for high office ought to go, say, to a professional, who is equipped to teach actors, who can teach him?" "I think they all should," Moore said. Buckley observed that politics and snappy witticisms do not necessarily go hand in hand.
Case in point: Adlai Stevenson. "As the story goes," Buckley said, "Adlai was then, in 1956, running for the presidency against Eisenhower.
Adlai had just lost a primary in Minnesota.
Someone asked Raymond Moley, a pundit of the time, how he explained the loss that Adlai, known for his witticisms, had suffered in Minnesota.
Moley shrugged and said: `Did you ever try to to tell a joke in Minneapolis?' " Now that is, of course, a foul canard, a scandalous fabrication, a vile slur against the good people of Minneapolis, and Bill Buckley may never again be invited to speak to the Golden Gophers. Citing the acting tricks a politician might use, Moore said: "You should look people in the eye.
Your eyes should never waver.
The minute you look away, even if to think, you've broken attention. ... The wavering of the eye can appear to be a lie." And Buckley said what cannot be denied: "It usually is, I suppose, with a politician, isn't it?" At the end, Buckley said: "Would you conclude that the emphasis on television weeds out a lot of people who don't have this theatrical flair but would probably do splendidly if given a chance?" `Absolutely," Moore said.
"If you can't sell your ideas to somebody across the table, then you can't sell your ideas to a hundred million people on television." Actually, that's not necessarily true, but the point being made is that a candidate's ideas have got to be sold.
And the politician has got to do the selling. And in this pursuit, a touch of the theatrical does no harm. "But," Buckley said, "suppose your ideas are Socrates, and you can't sell your ideas to the Athenian assembly.
Then it's the Athenians who are the losers." "Yes," Moore agreed, "and we wouldn't have democracy."
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: INTERVIEWS (90%); ACTORS & ACTRESSES (89%); SOCIETY, SOCIAL ASSISTANCE & LIFESTYLE (79%); KEYBOARD INSTRUMENTS (70%); WRITERS (70%); ELECTIONS & POLITICS (66%); SINGERS & MUSICIANS (65%); CELEBRITIES (%); MOVIES (%); TELEVISION (%)

Industry: ACTORS & ACTRESSES (89%); KEYBOARD INSTRUMENTS (70%); WRITERS (70%); SINGERS & MUSICIANS (65%)

Geographic: MINNEAPOLIS, MN, USA (87%); MINNESOTA, USA (90%); UNITED STATES (91%)

Load-Date: August 1, 2007


End of Document
