



The New York Times
October 13, 1985, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1985 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk; REVIEW
Length: 1791 words
Byline: By Vermont Royster; Vermont Royster is a political columnist and editor emeritus of The Wall Street Journal. His journalistic memories of Franklin D. Roosevelt in the 1930's are in ''My Own, My Country's Time.''
Body


FDR By Ted Morgan. Illustrated. 830 pp. New York: Simon & Schuster. $22.95.
NO American President has so dominated his times as Franklin Delano Roosevelt, and no President since Lincoln has been so much written about. There are multivolume biographies by James MacGregor Burns, Arthur Schlesinger Jr. and Frank Freidel, as well as innumerable books by those who were associated with Roosevelt, memoirs by journalists and studies by historians, political scientists and other scholars.
Now comes a popular one-volume biography that, without ignoring Roosevelt's political actions during the Great Depression or World War II, focuses more on the man - his chilhood, marriage, struggle with polio and relations with family, friends, enemies, subordinates and rivals. Ted Morgan, previously author of ''Churchill: Young Man in a Hurry 1874-1915,'' seems to have done his research for ''FDR'' as thoroughly as an academic historian; his notes on his sources are extensive, and he has interviewed many of the survivors of the Roosevelt years. What emerges is a fascinating three-dimensional portrait of this extraordinary man. Mr. Morgan's work is neither that of a slavish idolator nor of a hostile critic. The portrait he draws is of a great man with human frailties. To one who knew Roosevelt as a reporter, the portrait seems accurate.
The story begins in 1882, when Roosevelt was born into a family as aristocratic as any we have had in this democratic country. A progenitor of James Roosevelt, Franklin's father, came from Holland around 1650, and a forefather of Sara Delano, his mother, joined the Plymouth Colony in 1621. His cousin Theodore Roosevelt was in the White House before him. Franklin was an only child, and all the rest of her days his mother fought what Mr. Morgan calls a ''veiled but intense battle'' to retain possession of him. This did much to shape his personality and gave him trouble in his marriage.
Roosevelt went to Groton School, where he was an indifferent scholar, and then to Harvard College, where he fared not much better in the classroom. But he did become president of The Harvard Crimson. That post gave him his first taste of power and influence. Mr. Morgan says it also first revealed a proclivity for boasting of accomplishments that weren't his. For many years he claimed credit for a scoop in the paper about how the president of Harvard would vote in the election of 1900. That was, in Mr. Morgan's words, ''a bold-faced lie,'' not admitted until 1931. ''FDR was a gifted and facile liar,'' he says, and he ''had a reputation for being two-faced among his fellow Harvardmen.''
Mr. Morgan devotes much space to Franklin's courtship of his cousin Eleanor and their marriage and honeymooon, because Eleanor played such a major role in his life. No one ever thought of Eleanor as a beauty, ''but she was attractive to men, tall and willowy, with lovely eyes and a full-breasted hourglass figure.'' Unfortunately, she was ''an emotionally wounded young woman.'' She came to the marriage bed ''with a rare degree of ignorance even for those times'' and later told her daughter that the physical side of marriage ''was not an enjoyable one.'' Although she bore him six children (one died in infancy), this feeling may have had something to do with her reaction to Franklin's affair with her social secretary, Lucy Mercer, while he was Assistant Secretary of the Navy during World War I. After that she and Franklin kept to separate beds.
Nonetheless, the record is clear that they shared a close life, bonded together by mutual esteem and affection. Mr. Morgan's account of her devotion after Frank-lin contracted polio in 1921 is poignant. Often she had to help him with a catheter to empty his bladder, and she bathed and fed him like a baby. As every other biographer has done, Mr. Morgan sees the polio experience as a turning point in Roosevelt's life. Until then he had been a tall, handsome, athletic young man who impressed other men and was attractive to the ladies: ''Everything had come easily, and he was accustomed to being showered with praise and affection by significant figures from his mother to his boss at the Navy Department. He had not developed the protective psychological hardiness that comes from being hurt.''
He felt his political career was over. His spirits might have been much lower, except that his doctor, as quoted by Mr. Morgan, found his sexual function was ''undiminished.'' Those who knew him at Warm Springs, Ga., where he went for months every year for therapy, ''confirmed that he had 'girlfriends,' '' and his son Elliott said Roosevelt had an affair with Marguerite (Missy) LeHand, his longtime and devoted secretary. She always treated him with wifelike familiarity, Mr. Morgan writes, and she gave him a ''quarter century of absolute devotion,'' becoming ''a sort of surrogate wife while Eleanor pursued her own activities.''
But Roosevelt did more than survive polio; his spirit triumphed over it. ''It was this spiritual battle, this passage from despair to hope, this refusal to accept defeat, this ability to learn from adversity, that transformed him from a shallow, untested, selfishly ambitious and sometimes unscrupulous young man into the mature figure we know as FDR,'' Mr. Morgan says.
Before polio struck, he had been the Vice-Presidential candidate on the Democratic ticket in 1920, and it did not take him long to re-enter politics when he began to recuperate. He was a key supporter of Al Smith in his successful run to become Governor of New York in 1922, an effort that convinced politicians of his political influence and acuity and set him on a course that would take him to the governorship in 1928. As Governor he advanced many ideas that were to mark his early Presidency - repeal of the Prohibition amendment, government regulation of electric utilities, unemployment insurance and the use of public works to provide jobs. And it was in Albany that he drew into his camp many who were to be closely associated with him in Washington -Frances Perkins, James A. Farley, Henry Morgenthau, Raymond Moley and Harry Hopkins. As Mr. Morgan says, he ''had a talent for governing. Whatever the office, he filled it with natural ease. By training and instinct, he knew how to handle the controls. . . . He knew how to make half a loaf sound like a feast.''
Mr. Morgan's account of Roosevelt's years as President, from 1933 to 1945, does not change the record, and it will not change anyone's mind about Roosevelt's policies. But he does tell in an engaging way stories that throw light on Roosevelt's style as President, describing, for example, how he and Secretary of the Treasury Morgenthau, sitting at his bedside, casually changed the price of gold while the Roosevelt children romped playfully through the room. And he gives one a feeling for how Roosevelt worked and kept personal control of many operations. Roosevelt had a habit of setting up dual lines of authority. For instance, he kept Secretary of State Cordell Hull in the dark on many foreign policy decisions and used Raymond Moley and Adolph Berle, lower-ranking officers in the State Department, as his personal contacts there. This practice caused confusion but no great problems until Harry S. Truman succeeded to the Presidency in April 1945, in almost total ignorance of Roosevelt's postwar plans and what he had agreed on with Joseph Stalin and Winston Churchill at the Yalta conference in February. T HE world will long debate what happened at Yalta. Like others before him, Mr. Morgan thinks the trouble was not with the postwar arrangements negotiated with Stalin but with the fact that Stalin did not keep his promises. Where Roosevelt erred was in his assumption ''that the other fellow is a good guy who will respond with decency if he is treated right.'' But that assumption was related to another. As Mr. Morgan puts it in an earlier chapter, ''in Roosevelt's book the man he couldn't handle was not yet born.'' In any case, it seems a risky way to run the affairs of a nation for any President, especially for one who, Mr. Morgan says, was in deteriorating health throughout his third term in office. By the time he took the oath of office the fourth time, only a few months before his death, his physical weakness was obvious to most people who saw him.
How, in the end, does Mr. Morgan take the measure of this man? ''Those who worked closely with him attested to the brilliance of his mind and the breadth of his knowledge. . . . The other side of that political intelligence was a lack of frankness, a passion for manipulation, a mental and emotional shallowness, and a streak of vindictiveness. . . . Although the president of an open society, he often operated in secrecy.'' Nonetheless, as he says, ''a man who could not walk became president of a country that had lost hope. With a simple set of beliefs - a belief that things could be improved, a belief in the democratic process - he transmitted his own confidence to the nation. . . . The country we live in today is to a great extent of his making. . . . Finally, he transformed the world we live in.''
How to measure what he made of his country - and the world - is not the task of a biographer. That verdict awaits the longer reach of history. But Ted Morgan has made a vivid contribution to that judgment.
 
'DIGGING WITH A TEASPOON'
Biographers often spend much of their time trying to gain access to information about their subjects - unearthing letters, discovering private files or family archives. But in writing ''FDR,'' Ted Morgan found his problem was not the lack of material, but its abundance. ''When I first went to the Roosevelt archives at Hyde Park,'' he said in a recent interview, ''it was like trying to dig to China with a teaspoon.''
Drawing a portrait against the backdrop of one of the most eventful periods in American history, Mr. Morgan, a former correspondent for The New York Herald Tribune, resisted the temptation to broaden his focus. ''I didn't want to rewrite the record of the New Deal or World War II,'' he said. ''I was more interested in a character study, and I was after anything I could find that revealed character. I approached it the way a photographer might - always focusing on the subject of a portrait even if the background is blurred.
''I wasn't trying to be in the tradition of a genteel biography; I was going to try for total disclosure, even though it might be considered in poor taste or considered to deal with subjects that historians sometimes try to avoid. I was thinking of what Samuel Johnson said: 'If nothing but the bright side of characters be shown, we should sit in despondency and consider it utterly impossible to imitate them in anything.' '' - Mark A. Uhlig

Graphic

 
Cariacature of F. D. Roosevelt
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (90%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (90%); PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); WRITERS (90%); MARRIAGE (89%); WORLD WAR II (79%); BOOK REVIEWS (78%); POLITICS (78%); HISTORY (76%); JOURNALISM (76%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (76%); GREAT DEPRESSION (74%); DEMOCRACIES (73%)

Company: SIMON & SCHUSTER INC  (58%); SIMON & SCHUSTER INC  (58%)

Industry: NAICS511130 BOOK PUBLISHERS  (58%);  SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING  (58%); WRITERS (90%); BOOK REVIEWS (78%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (79%)


End of Document
