



New Era (Windhoek)
March 19, 2010 Friday


Copyright 2010 AllAfrica Global Media. All Rights Reserved
Length: 1483 words
Byline: Paul Shipale
Body


As has been the custom with every newly inaugurated chief executive, President Hifikepunye Pohamba will surely open his tenure of office by delivering an inaugural speech - and I will not be surprised about the usual reaction from the so-called 'free press' who will try to downgrade the president's remarks.
Their thesis would be hardly unique with widespread sentiments and heaped with contempt that 'presidential inaugural talks are mostly vapid rhetoric with meaningless promises, which will be inevitably broken anyway'.
True, most inaugurals are forgotten almost as soon as they are delivered and only a few survive the test of time and enter the nation's literature, to be quoted in generations to come - but what do the experts say?
American writer Kathleen Hall Jamieson, an expert on rhetoric, particularly that of presidents, says that while modern speeches may contain some new content, 'they always draw upon a stock of earlier speeches and existing rhetorical forms' and that 'inaugural addresses are a new president's opportunity to set a tone, to think big and to talk in terms of lofty vision'.
We are going to analyse the presidential inaugural talks in the context of political platform, discerning a common theme in all of them such as the preservation of liberty and the destiny of the nation, as well as the preoccupation of global affairs, along with an increasing pessimism due to the problems resulting from the absorption of minorities and various other domestic concerns.
Why is this type of writing needed? Presidencies represent ideological contrasts sometimes and inaugural speeches can be periods of major transitions as it is the case here with the nation going from adolescence to adulthood.
Inaugural addresses can also be used as a window through which to examine the change of political power. The writing will also seek the links between rhetorical substance and style and the characteristics of the president's political and social viewpoints.
When a new president is elected, citizens often focus on the inaugural address. Presidents use rhetorical language that incorporates appealing functions and expressions with well-composed structure and clear arguments in order to garner citizens' support for their policies.
Indeed, a presidential inaugural speech is a good opportunity for presidents to articulate not only administrative goals, policy and philosophy but also their hopes and dreams for the nation.
The communication process of inaugural addresses creates new forms of social, cultural, and political communication even if there is also an assumption that the thoughts and consciousness of the elected president will be reflected in the president's inaugural address - forgetting that a message is an independent social system acting as a symbolic or cognitive system (Leydesdorff, 2003).
The meaning of political texts can be easily analysed using network-oriented indicators and visualisations. A combination of network-analytical methods with sentimental text analysis is used, providing an analytical tool to help understand not only the relationship between rhetorical substance and style, but also the characteristics of presidents' political and social viewpoints.
I am saying this based on the art of public speech and persuasion as written by William D.S. Bennett in his book, "The art of Public Speaking". Bennett says that STYLE is the putting of thought into words with two separate branches of art:
Good language prose: this implies more than mere absence of mistakes in grammar, syntax, pronunciation and spelling. It means well-chosen words, well turned sentences, and clearly expressed development and unity of thought. Good Psychological Appeal: By this is meant the ability to reach the feelings, mind and conscience of the audience most effectively with Good structure that will make the development of thought and connection clear, maintain the interest steadily without letting it sag, add force to argument and give symmetry and beauty with unity and continuity that give variety and interest and make everything flow rather than "a broken-backed" type of speech.
Style is all about beauty of thought, beauty of word and beauty of construction. Will the presidential inaugural address use pauses, change of pace, speed, tone and volume for maximum dramatic impact? What about body language and use of voice? Will they convey confidence, authority, and command?
On SUBSTANCE: Will the President manage to communicate very important and, at times, contradictory messages on the extreme poverty, unemployment, HIV/AIDS on the one hand, and extreme optimism of 'a pro-poor' budget, including for the war veterans, that problems could be solved on the other hand? How will the President package his speech?
Will it have at least noticeable sound bites such as Kennedy's "ask not what your country can do for you...", or Martin Luther King's 'I have a dream' or even the founding father's "Namibia is for ever free"?
Will such sound bites be prophetic? How will the President approach the question of unity in diversity and managing our diversity? Will he be inclusive? Will he set precedents?
Who are the men behind the President's speeches? What factors are they going to include in the presidential inaugural address? Which rhetorical substance and style, the political and social viewpoints of the President are they going to incorporate in his speech and how are they going to combine all these?
According to Robert Schlesinger in his book 'How great speeches are written', FD Roosevelt's admonition that "the only thing we have to fear is fear itself" and his confident, calming tone that soothed the jangled national psyche at a critical moment and Kennedy's singing imagery of a new generation of Americans coming to power with a spirit of self-sacrifice ("Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do for your country") inspired the nation and set the tone for their administrations.
But the two speeches have something more in common: they were written by Raymond Moley, a Columbia University professor of public law and by Ted Sonrensen, JFK's first speechwriter.
"In both cases, regarding authorial credit, Moley and Sorensen were not writing in vacuums or for themselves.
They were reflecting the men who would give the speeches. And regardless of who first committed what word to paper, it is the president who delivers the speech who owns it and deserves full credit for it, for better or worse: The president puts himself and his credibility behind a speech, imbues it with his authority and office just like any idea by the company's subordinates belongs to the DG, CEO, MD, PS and ministers.
And while sentiments like placing the country before self have appeared in different ways over the centuries, we recall these specific moments not only because of phrasing but because the words matched the men and both suited the broader historical moment.
I have no reason to doubt that the president has prolific eloquent speech writers who will be able to 'translate the complex into the simple, the corporate into the conversational, the legalese into the poetic with speeches that define the struggle over the hearts and souls, embellishing our senses, defining the meaning of events, encapsulating expectations and translating our visions, thoughts, dreams and ideas into tangible concrete actions, while embodying with flesh and capturing the fears and optimism into catchy phrases'.
Let us just hope that the President's inaugural speech will match this historical moment and capture our transitional period of a nascent democracy from adolescence to adulthood with President Pohamba as the midwife of that transition of 'a visionary nation...' just as the Founding President ushered us into the birth of a new nation that is 'forever free, sovereign and independent'.
I also wish this time around that the President will be introduced by 'a praise singer' in typical African tradition as they do in South Africa. We can even use those cattle herders to do that job or Tate Vilho Tshilongo also known as 'Amwiindili gweesale', after all, we are Africans.
When President Pohamba said, "If there are laws, policies or regulations that are inhibiting..., they must be changed", how about changing the State House flag's colours on the State House motorcade?
How will the President approach the question of unity in diversity and managing our diversity? Who is going to be his PM? Will there be surprises?
Happy independence celebrations Namibia. God bless the President-elect and the founding father of the nation and God bless our 'visionary nation' on the move toward Vision 2030.
Stand tall and proud my people on the shoulders of your forefathers and wave those banners of victory.
Celebrate your culture and know where you are coming from, where you are and where you intend to go. As El Ché would say, Hasta la Victoria siempre!
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: EXECUTIVES (89%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); WRITERS (74%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (71%); Namibia (%)

Industry: WRITERS (74%)

Geographic: WINDHOEK, NAMIBIA (90%); NAMIBIA (93%)

Load-Date: March 24, 2010


End of Document
