



The Straits Times (Singapore)
March 29, 2009 Sunday


Copyright 2009 Singapore Press Holdings Limited All Rights Reserved
Length: 1298 words
Byline: Janadas Devan, Review Editor
Body


When do we know a great speech is great? While it is being delivered? A few minutes later? A few years later?
Some of Winston Churchill's greatest speeches didn't strike his contemporaries as particularly great.
'I have nothing to offer but blood, toil, tears and sweat.' That's a now famous line. Churchill uttered it in the House of Commons on becoming Britain's prime minister in May 1940, as France was about to fall. He was not 'well received' in the House, one of his biographers, Roy Jenkins, reports.
'Never in the field of human conflict has so much been owed by so many to so few.' That's another now famous line. Churchill uttered it at the conclusion of the Battle of Britain, paying tribute to RAF pilots. One of his private secretaries, John Colville, writes in his diary of the speech: 'It was less oratory than usual.'
How about that famous line of Franklin Roosevelt's - 'the only thing we have to fear is fear itself' - that has been quoted so often in recent months amid the worst global economic crisis since the Great Depression? Did Americans hear that line at Roosevelt's inauguration as president of the United States on March 4, 1933 and instantly feel better?
Actually, few even noticed the line when it was spoken. People didn't applaud it; newspapers didn't highlight it. Indeed, the line didn't become famous till four years later, during the 1936 presidential campaign, 'when Democrats emblazoned it everywhere as a way to show FDR's success in having rescued the country', reports Jonathan Alter in The Defining Moment: FDR's Hundred Days And The Triumph Of Hope.
In 1933, the line in Roosevelt's inauguration that received the most sustained applause was when he said that if Congress did not approve his rescue programme quickly, he would 'ask Congress for the one remaining instrument to meet the crisis: broad executive power to wage war against the emergency, as great as the power that would be given to me if we were in fact invaded by a foreign foe'.
The New York Times and most other newspapers focused 'on the vivid wartime allusions (Roosevelt) employed five times during his speech - martial metaphors that suggested that there was, in fact, plenty to fear after all', Alter notes. The Depression was so terrifying - the unemployment rate was 25 per cent when Roosevelt took office - the fear so palpable, what reassured people most was not the suggestion they had nothing to fear but rather the suggestion that Roosevelt was prepared to assume dictatorial powers if necessary to assuage that fear.
The story of the origin of that 'fear' line is instructive. Mrs Eleanor Roosevelt claimed that her husband had borrowed it from Henry David Thoreau, whose writings he had been reading as the speech was being drafted. Thoreau writes: 'Nothing is so much to be feared as fear.'
One of Roosevelt's aides, Raymond Moley, dismissed this suggestion, claiming that he did not see Roosevelt read any book then. Moley claimed that another Roosevelt adviser, Louis Howe, had taken the line from a department store advertisement that he and Howe had seen in a newspaper in February 1933. Subsequent checks of newspapers during the period failed to unearth any such advertisement.
Alter suggests the line probably came from a New York Times story two years earlier that had quoted the chairman of the US Chamber of Commerce saying: 'In a condition of this kind, the thing to be feared most is fear itself.' Indeed, the sentiment seems to have been in the air for quite a few years before Roosevelt invoked it, one reason perhaps why it wasn't much noticed when he did.
Everyone understood fear was crippling; everyone realised it was making a bad situation worse; everyone knew - and yet they went on fearing. It was only in retrospect, four years later, when the fear had abated, that Americans realised that the only thing they ought to have feared in 1933 was fear itself. Wisdom is retrospective; memorable speeches become memorable only in memory.
This is something President Barack Obama might remember as he is buffeted by criticism that he is no longer communicating effectively with Americans. 'Obama struggles as communicator,' one newspaper has headlined. He is speaking too often, the pundits say, devaluing the bully-pulpit by appearing on television with comedians and holding countless 'town hall' meetings. He has failed to channel people's anger; he seems too detached; he is too 'professorial'.
Much of this criticism is unjust. Roosevelt held almost 1,000 press conferences in his 12 years in office - or an average of one press conference every four or five days, a record that no president since has matched. He delivered dozens of 'fireside chats', his famous radio broadcasts, heard by a larger proportion of Americans then than any of Mr Obama's speeches have been over the past two months. If appearing on Jay Leno or holding 'town hall' meetings constitutes overexposure, Roosevelt was far more exposed than Mr Obama has been.
Mr James Carville, writing in The Financial Times on Saturday, argues: 'It is not that Mr Obama is not communicating as well (as he was during the campaign); it is that what he is communicating (as president) is too complex to reduce to simple words.'
There is some truth in that. After all, Roosevelt had to explain only the functioning of old-fashioned banks. Mr Obama has to explain derivatives, hedge funds, credit default swaps, liquidity puts and goodness knows what else. The humorist Will Rogers, after listening to Roosevelt's first fireside chat, said: 'He made everyone understand it, even the bankers. He is the first Harvard man to know enough to drop three syllables when he has something to say. Why compared to me, he's almost illiterate.'
Mr Obama, also a Harvard man, can't 'drop three syllables' - 'leverage', say, which Mr Carville believes flummoxed Mr Obama's audience on Jay Leno - even if he tried. The current crisis is a crisis of complexity as much as it is of liquidity, and there is not much that Mr Obama can do to simplify it. The public would sense the condescension if he tried.
But there is another reason the pundits, if not the public, have suddenly found Mr Obama's communication skills wanting. 'The only thing we have to fear is fear itself,' Roosevelt said in 1933 - 'nameless, unreasoning, unjustified terror which paralyses needed efforts to convert retreat into advance' - but few heard him say that till four years later.
But our romanticised historical memory is that everyone heard him immediately and fear was immediately erased. Great speeches, we believe, have that magical effect. Mr Obama gave such speeches when he was campaigning. So why can't he do so again - and the crisis would be resolved magically?
Because that is not how it happened. It never could; it never will. After delivering his great 'fear' line, Roosevelt went on to deliver a series of fireside chats on the economic crisis that contained no memorable lines but 'made everyone understand' the crisis, 'even bankers'. He ultimately succeeded because those quotidian, explanatory speeches got things moving, established a consensus, produced action.
People slowly realised there was nothing to fear, not because of that one splendid line of poetry, but because of the reams of effective prose that followed - prose that produced the New Deal. We remember the poetry now because the prose worked.
Mr Obama, whose instincts are better than his critics', knows he must govern in prose. If he succeeds, people will remember the poetry - in good time.

Complex issues 
'It is not that Mr Obama is not communicating as well (as he was during the campaign); it is that what he is communicating (as president) is too complex to reduce to simple words.'
MR JAMES CARVILLE, writing in The Financial Times
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Publication-Type: Newspaper

Subject: GREAT DEPRESSION (89%); ECONOMIC DEPRESSION (87%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (78%); WORLD WAR II (78%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); POETRY (77%); PRESIDENTIAL POWERS (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (77%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (77%); WRITERS (77%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%); NEGATIVE EMPLOYMENT NEWS (76%); BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (75%); AIR FORCES (73%); DIARY KEEPING & JOURNALING (73%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (71%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (71%); NEGATIVE ECONOMIC NEWS (70%); BUSINESS NEWS (66%); ECONOMY & ECONOMIC INDICATORS (66%); POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS (66%); HOLDING COMPANIES (58%); PRIME MINISTERS (56%)

Industry: WRITERS (77%); AIR FORCES (73%)

Geographic: UNITED STATES (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (91%); FRANCE (72%)

Load-Date: March 28, 2009


End of Document
