



The New York Times
January 19, 1986, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


Copyright 1986 The New York Times Company
Section: Section 7; Page 33, Column 1; Book Review Desk; REVIEW
Length: 1141 words
Byline: By Richard C. Wade; Richard C. Wade is a Distinguished Professor of History at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York.
Body


FDR The New York Years. 1928-1933. By Kenneth S. Davis. 512 pp. New York: Random House. $19.95.
IN 1982 Congress appropriated $25,000 to underwrite a joint session of the Senate and House of Representatives to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the birth of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, the man who was President longer than any other. Two years ago there was no recognition by the Federal Government of the centennial of Eleanor Roosevelt's birth or of her years in the White House and the activities that earned her the appellation ''the first lady of the world.'' However, in 1974 Congress appropriated $7,500,000 for a proper remembrance of Herbert Hoover's birth. Kenneth S. Davis's book on Roosevelt's years as Governor of New York is a healthy corrective to such mindless official judgments.
To be sure, it covers only the years 1928 to 1933, but those Roosevelt years in Albany foreshadowed most of the elements of the New Deal; witnessed the forging of the effective, if always awkward, political alliance of the Democratic Party regulars and the reformers; and saw the recruiting of a ''brains trust'' that would dominate Washington for a decade. The book also clarifies the tangled relationship between Roosevelt and his wife that has fascinated scholars for a generation. The author's style is unnecessarily breezy and his narrative detours are somewhat indulgent, but fundamentally this volume takes its place in the rich literature about the Roosevelt legacy.
The central question is whether it would have been possible to predict the New Deal by looking at F.D.R.'s governorship. After all, in the Presidential campaign of 1932, the Democratic candidate had complained about Hoover's spending and promised to reduce it by 25 percent. In a few speeches he emphasized the responsibility of government to people, especially the weakest and poorest. But the public got only a hint of the New Deal revolution that lay ahead. It is the strength of Mr. Davis's book that it recounts Roosevelt's years as Governor in a way that explains much of what was to come.
Nine months after Roosevelt became Governor, the stock market collapsed and the Great Depression began. Like nearly everyone else, he underestimated its depth and persistence. The census of 1920 had revealed that, for the first time, more Americans lived in cities than in the countryside. The depression that began in 1929 would be like no other. It was the country's first urban depression. It continued year after year with no hope of recovery. Instinctively and with little theory, Roosevelt understood the magnitude of the historical change and moved, however cautiously, to confront it in the nation's most important urban state.
The results were only modestly successful. But after his election as President, he told Raymond Moley, a reformer, and Ed Flynn, a regular, what he had learned as Governor: ''1. World is sick. 2. America is sick. . . . Time to face the facts and get away from the idea that we can return to the conditions of 29-30. . . . What is needed is action along . . . new lines. [If necessary] I shall ask Congress for . . . broad executive powers to conduct a war against the world emergency just as great [as] would be given if we were invaded by a foreign foe.'' Those who had watched Roosevelt's career from his time as a state senator in the Progressive period in the first decade of the century and his exposure to the salient issues of housing, child labor, trade unionism and conservation could predict his response on both policy and programs while not expecting him to be a radical advocate of either. The Depression and his experience as Governor only sustained his faith in New York's liberal tradition, a tradition he would return to again and again as President.
When Roosevelt brought together those age-old enemies, fervent reformers and sturdy party regulars, as Al Smith had done before, some newspaper commentators considered him opportunistic, while to others he appeared skillfully pragmatic. At any rate, this coalition served Roosevelt and the Democratic Party well for a generation. Ultimately this ecumenical politics was the base of his national success for four terms. Mr. Davis covers in great detail the Governor's relations with both sides, noting that neither was very happy with the arrangement but each understood its utility. In 1928 Roosevelt won the governorship by a very narrow margin (he was known as Mr. 0.5 Percent); two years later he had a landslide. Some of the author's best sections deal with F.D.R.'s adroit, if not always elevating, balancing of the competing forces. Walter Lippmann wrote in bewilderment that ''it is not easy to say with certainty whether his left-wing or his right-wing supporters are the most deceived.''
Perhaps the most arresting part of this volume is its description of Roosevelt's assembling of the brains trust in New York. Seldom has any governor been able to attract such talent. He did it largely by raiding Columbia University, but the names would reverberate throughout the 30's - Moley, Rexford G. Tugwell, Adolf A. Berle Jr., Henry Morgenthau Jr., Frances Perkins and a host of others. It is in their advice and activities during Roosevelt's years as Governor that Mr. Davis finds the genesis of the New Deal. The brains trusters, many of them abrasive people, had conflicting views about everything, but F.D.R. presided genially over their chaos, picking and choosing advice without great regard for theory and none for ideology. MR. DAVIS finds not only the seeds of the New Deal but those of modern feminism in Roosevelt's years as Governor. His marriage had never been very satisfactory, and by the time he was elected Governor, he and Eleanor both accepted that it could not be reconstituted. Yet their relationship could be mutually advantageous. Eleanor's interest, the author notes, was ''the cause of women's rights and an expanded role for women in public affairs. She thus used her husband as a means toward her ends.'' But Franklin ''simultaneously used her as a means toward his own ends.'' The consequence was a startling increase in the influence of women in state affairs.
''FDR: The New York Years,'' the second volume in Mr. Davis's continuing biography of Roosevelt, has greater sweep that the title suggests. When it opens, Roosevelt, struggling to recover from polio, wins a narrow victory in a gubernatorial race in the midst of Republican prosperity, but by its end, a confident President-elect rides through the night to Washington to confront an intractable Depression. In between, as Mr. Davis reveals Roosevelt's problems and his development, he also shows what was happening to the whole country. The book is an impressive new panel in the larger panorama of modern America that Kenneth S. Davis has created in a number of biographies and histories.

Graphic

 
Photo of Franklin D. Roosevelt
Classification


Language: ENGLISH

Subject: APPROPRIATIONS (90%); BOOK REVIEWS (90%); GOVERNMENT & PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); GOVERNORS (89%); GREAT DEPRESSION (79%); US PRESIDENTS (79%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); WRITERS (78%); ANNIVERSARIES (77%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (77%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (76%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (75%); STOCK MARKET CRASHES (60%)

Company: NEW YORK RESTAURANT GROUP INC  (92%); NEW YORK RESTAURANT GROUP INC  (92%)

Industry: SIC5812 EATING PLACES  (92%); BOOK REVIEWS (90%); WRITERS (78%); STOCK MARKET CRASHES (60%)

Geographic: ALBANY, NY, USA (78%); NEW YORK, USA (93%); UNITED STATES (93%)


End of Document
