=== FILE: batch1_5_page0.txt ===
Here's a text version of the provided article, attempting to avoid column overlap:


PORTRAIT OF THE GOP
BY RAYMOND MOLEY

Thirty-seven years have passed since the electorate in the Congressional elections of 1930 handed a vote of no confidence to the Republican Party. When we realize that a new generation has come of age since then, it is obvious why those people who shape public opinion have portrayed the GOP as an object of pity, scorn, contempt and ridicule. Most of the active articulate people in the communications media, in college classrooms, in the pulpit, in Congress and in the studies where political books are written are within the age span of 25 to 55. Thus, political evaluations are pregnant with the prejudices and preconceptions of the period when those people came of age. A great proportion were either unborn or in grammar school when FDR was elected.

In writing of the Republican Party they conveniently ignore the years when the GOP was shaping national policy, mostly for the better. For as we review the years when these people knew public affairs at firsthand, the record of the GOP was that of defeats, internal conflict and sectionalism. Because of the party's minority status, it lacked any lasting legislative or executive achievement.

It is refreshing, even inspiring, to find two writers of the post-New-Deal era who, breaking away from the prejudices of their contemporaries, portray the Republican Party as a vital institution quite worthy of offering itself as an alternative in a political system in which liberty, progress and national health and security can be guaranteed only by a strong two-party system.

ACCENT ON ORGANIZATION

These writers are Stephen Hess and David S. Broder. Their book is "The Republican Establishment: The Present and Future of the G.O.P."* The authors are neither ideologues nor apologists. The book is written to inform and guide an electorate that faces a year in which it must make great decisions.

These authors are distinctive among political writers who prefer to deal only with candidates and issues. They begin with an appraisal of the GOP as an organization or, rather, a number of organizations: the Congressional leadership, the National Committee, the state governors and the splinter groups on the periphery. They show

*440 pages. Harper & Row. $7.95.

in a vividly interesting way how chairman Ray Bliss uses the machinery of the National Committee to build a firm grass-roots base for party success.

Then, since politics is people and leaders of people, there are lengthy profiles of the Presidential aspirants-Romney, Nixon, Percy, Reagan-and other figures in Congress and in the Statehouses. Here the portraiture is full, perceptive and scrupulously fair. In delineating these figures in the news, nothing is extenuated, or is aught "set down in malice."

DECLINE OF THE EAST

Finally, the great regions are examined-East, South, Middle West and West. There was a time in Republican history when only the Eastern Establishment, with its great financial and political base, and the Middle West, rooted in industry, counted in choosing candidates and shaping party policy. But now, as the authors show, the South and West must be reckoned with. For political influence has followed the drift of the population and economic power. The political dominance of the East exists no longer, despite its importance as the center of the communications media and its considerable community of "intellectuals" and writers.

The decline of the East, the authors say, is dramatic. In fifteen years its share of Republican governors has dropped from eight to five; in House seats, from 74 to 48. Maine, Vermont and Connecticut have Democratic governors. The East cannot recapture its past.

The brighter outlook for the GOP as 1968 approaches is in the results of the 1966 recovery. Nothing contributed so much to that recovery as the sane policies of leadership in Congress, the quiet labors of Ray Bliss with the "nuts and bolts" of party organization, the indefatigable campaigning of Richard Nixon and the dawning reality that the Great Society as envisioned by President Johnson only proves that this country is too big to be governed completely from Washington.

But opposition parties never win. The incumbents fail. And therein lies the speculation that shrouds the outcome in 1968. For if the President succeeds in repelling the Communist thrust into Southeast Asia, it will be difficult for even a revitalized. GOP to dislodge him.

Newsweek, October 30, 1967

=== FILE: batch1_7_page0.txt ===
PERSPECTIVE
SUBSIDY OR WINDFALL
BY RAYMOND MOLEY

Dolitical appeal, rather than econom-
ic sense and long-term constitu-
tional wisdom, has made the proposal
to share Federal revenues with the
states popular with all sorts of people.
Governors in both parties favor it be-
cause it would relieve them of some of
the unpleasant worry of collecting
taxes. Members of Congress love it
because it would please their tax-
burdened constituents at home. Con-
servatives are for it because it seems-
repeat seems-to be a way to return
power to the states. And federalizers
like Walter Heller support it because
his proposal would expand the power
of Congress over the states.
President Johnson and his fiscal
subordinates oppose it because it
would cut into their spending money.
On this issue LBJ, for the wrong rea-
son, is on the side of the angels.
The popularity of Federal revenue
sharing in Congress is shown in the
more than 70 bills introduced during
the first five months of this session. If
we count the co-sponsors of a Senate
bill on the subject, at least 100 repre-
sentatives and senators are backing
some form of the idea. Some plans
would return a percentage of the in-
dividual income-tax revenues to the
states as a substitute for the specific
grants-in-aid already in effect. Others
would give the handout in addition to
the grants-in-aid.
ALLOCATE RESPONSIBILITY
When Heller first proposed reve-
nue sharing, he said it would be a
way of disposing of an anticipated
Federal surplus. But when deficits
continued, he changed his position
and said he would favor the plan even
under deficit conditions. His proposal
would give the money in addition to
the present grants-in-aid.
The bills are of infinite variety.
They differ in the percentage of Fed-
eral revenues that they would return
and also in the allocation of the wind-
fall among the states.
There can be no denying the basic
proposition upon which the plans rest.
Grants-in-aid have grown prodigious-
ly. They have hopelessly scrambled
the relations between the Federal
government and the states. When
Taft was President, Federal grants to
the states amounted to only $3 mil-
lion. By 1920 they were $33 million;
by 1941 $836 million. In the past
twenty years they have increased
from $1 billion to $15 billion.
In principle, what we need is not
revenue sharing but responsibility
sharing. Indeed, much of the Ameri-
can Constitution has to do with the
sharing of responsibility between the
Federal establishment and the states.
For a century and a half, government
was nicely divided. There was the
Federal province, the states' prov-
ince and certain areas of joint respon-
sibility. But legislative actions have
greatly increased the functions of joint
responsibility and also programs in
which the Federal government has
taken over completely. The states
have been the most willing partici-
pants in this change.
DISCIPLINE OF TAXATION
Perhaps it is too late to reconstruct
the balance, even through constitu-
tional amendment. But the proposal
to share the revenues is to create a
still greater imbalance and still more
centralized power in Washington.
For the simple facts of political life
must convince anyone that if Congress
returns Federal revenues, governors,
legislatures and cities will not levy the
taxes needed to do what they should
do themselves. A windfall from Wash-
ington would relieve them of the
painful business of taxing their own
people.
As I noted earlier this year, taxation
is discipline. Those who levy taxes at
the state and local level must justify
their action because the new money
meets a manifest need. Discipline in-
volves courage, since state and local
forms of taxation must be unpleasant
and unpopular among taxpayers. This
imposes upon the taxing authorities
the duty of making clear that the
money is needed. And it also imposes
upon state and local governments the
responsibility of making sure that the
money is prudently and efficiently
spent. When taxes are levied and rev-
enues spent close to the taxpayers,
countless eyes are upon the spenders.
Federal income taxes are also pain-
ful to the taxpayers. But they are pa-
tiently endured, like the weather and
the certainty of death. Those who im-
pose them are far away in Washing-
ton. It is almost impossible to fix re-
sponsibility. The money is spent by a
faceless bureaucracy. Taxpayers can-
not reach the spenders. They cannot
effectively complain to them and they
cannot vote them out of office. That
is the traditional evil of a centralized
government.
Newsweek, October 2, 1967
