

                                                                                                     Page 1 of 4
                                            Feel-Good Options All Over




                                        Feel-Good Options All Over
                                               The New York Times
                                                July 12, 2024 Friday
                                                Late Edition - Final



Copyright 2024 The New York Times Company

Section: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; Pg. 2
Length: 1111 words

Body


Looking for something to do in New York? Check out the array of festivals on offer, including four days of improv
comedy and three days of improv jazz.

Comedy

 Fun & Dumb Improv Festival

 July 11-14 at various locations in Brooklyn; brooklyncc.com.

 Now in its third year, the Brooklyn Comedy Collective's biggest bash has grown even bigger, with more than 600
improv comedians performing in over 160 shows, as well as a dozen-plus workshops, at the B.C.C.'s performance
spaces in Williamsburg: Eris (167 Graham Avenue), B.C.C. Pig Pen (144 Boerum Street) and B.C.C. Dog House
(137 Montrose Avenue).

  On Thursday at 8 p.m. at Eris, fans of ''Saturday Night Live'' can watch ''Chloe Troast and Coworkers'' on the
club's main stage, while in its Deep Space room, devotees of ''The Daily Show'' can take in ''The Daily Show
Writers.'' The weekend's other headliners on Eris's main stage include RaaaatScraps (at 10 p.m. on Friday), Tami
Sagher and Ed Herbstman (at 7 p.m. on Saturday), Business Casual (at 8 p.m. on Saturday), and the musical
improv group Baby Wants Candy (at 8 p.m. on Sunday). Late-night programming, which runs until 4 a.m. on
Saturday and Sunday, leans into the festival's titular branding, featuring sets such as a re-enactment of ''Whose
Line Is It Anyway?'' (at 1:15 a.m. on Saturday on Eris's main stage) and ''Slay's Anatomy,'' a spoof on ''Grey's
Anatomy'' (at 2:45 a.m. on Saturday in Eris's Deep Space room). Workshops, which are $40 to attend, will be held
from 11 a.m. to 7 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday at the Dog House.

 Single-day passes are $30 and weekend passes are $50 at Eventbrite. SEAN L. McCARTHY

 Music

 Sounds of Detroit: Celebrating 50 Years of J Dilla

 July 12 at 6 p.m. at Herbert Von King Park, 670 Lafayette Avenue, Brooklyn; cityparksfoundation.org.

 By the time J Dilla, born James Yancey, died in 2006 at the age of 32, he had subtly rewired hip-hop. In his short
but prolific career as a producer, he sourced and harvested deep-cut samples and collaged them into rich, smudgy
and soulful beats sought after by the likes of Common, A Tribe Called Quest and Busta Rhymes.

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 4
                                             Feel-Good Options All Over

 Yancey would have turned 50 this year. To mark the occasion, SummerStage is hosting a tribute concert on
Friday with a lineup steeped in Dilla lore. It includes Slum Village, the trio of high school friends he first performed
with in his native Detroit (now a duo of one surviving original member, T3, and the rapper and producer Young RJ);
and the Pharcyde, the Los Angeles group whose 1995 hit ''Runnin''' is exemplary of Dilla's production style. The
D.J.s Rich Medina and Breakbeat Lou will also perform.

 Admission is free. OLIVIA HORN

 Wide Open Works Festival

 July 11-13 at Shapeshifter Labs, 837 Union Street, Brooklyn; connectionworks.org/events.

  Since 2022 the nonprofit organization Connection Works has staked out the middle of July for Brooklyn jazz with
its Wide Open Works Festival, which gathers musicians from the borough whose ethos are aligned with the
festival's title: These improvisers and composers aren't just open to surprise connections, they live for them.

  Exemplifying this genre-agnostic spirit is Anna Webber Triangles, which features the bassist Chris Tordini, the
percussionist Ches Smith and the saxophonist Webber, whose compositions spin dizzying geometries. This all-star
indie trio will take the stage on Friday at 8:15 p.m. followed at 9:30 p.m. by the Dead Composers Club, a quartet led
by Noah Preminger on tenor saxophone and Rob Garcia on drums that is currently exploring the 12th-century
music of Hildegard von Bingen. On Saturday, the drummer Ra Kalam Bob Moses will lead two sets, first in a duo
and then a quintet. Day passes are $35; two- and three-day passes are $60 and $80. All are available on
Shapeshifter's website.

 On Friday and Saturday at Ibeam Brooklyn in Gowanus, which once hosted the Wide Open festival, another
midsummer music celebration emphasizing improvisation will take up residence: the first Brooklyn Free Spirit
Festival. Admission to each day's events is $20. ALAN SCHERSTUHL

 Kids

 West Side Fest

 July 12-14 at various locations in Manhattan; westsidefest.nyc.

  Families who normally flee the city on summer weekends may want to make an exception for this one: New York
is offering multiple festivals, all of them free.

 For three days, the West Side Cultural Network, a consortium of downtown Manhattan museums and parks, will
present West Side Fest. The fun begins with the Whitney Museum of American Art's Open Studio for Teens on
Friday. The fest also encompasses the Free Second Sundays program at the Whitney, which includes activities like
making art inspired by the children's literature in the exhibition ''Wanda Gág's World.''

 The High Line is participating as well, with Family Art Moment: Dream Wilder With Us on Saturday. The Rubin
Museum of Art's Family Sunday invites young fest-goers to make Buddhist-influenced 3-D mazes. Little Island will
host Creative Breaks, with a watercolor adventure on Friday and a Haitian cultural celebration on Saturday. (Details
and many more events are on the fest's website.)

 Also in Manhattan, children can enjoy the National Museum of Mathematics's NYC Math Festival on Saturday, and
L'Alliance New York's Bastille Day on Sunday.

 And all five boroughs will have activities for City of Water Day, a Saturday festival devoted to aquatic life and
conservation. LAUREL GRAEBER

 Dance

 Aakash Odedra Company

                                                                                                      Page 3 of 4
                                            Feel-Good Options All Over

  July 11-12 at 7:30 p.m. at the Rose Theater, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 10 Columbus Circle, Manhattan;
lincolncenter.org.

 Since founding his troupe in 2011, the South Asian-British choreographer and dancer Aakash Odedra has
garnered acclaim for captivating works that blend classical Indian and contemporary dance with theatrical flair. His
company comes to New York as part of India Week at Lincoln Center's Summer for the City series.

 Odedra's contribution is his performance with Hu Shenyuan of his piece ''Samsara,'' a duet inspired by the classic
Chinese novel ''Journey to the West.'' The work explores Buddhist philosophy and self-enlightenment through
strikingly lush physical vocabulary and visual design. The shows at the Rose Theater are nearly sold out, but
additional tickets may become available online and in person at the box office ahead of the shows.

 At the end of the month, Summer for the City also presents Urban Bush Women's ''Haint Blu'' (July 28 and Aug. 4)
and the annual BAAND Together Festival, featuring a superstar lineup of Ballet Hispánico, Alvin Ailey American
Dance Theater, American Ballet Theater, New York City Ballet and Dance Theater of Harlem (July 30-Aug. 3).
BRIAN SCHAEFER


https://www.nytimes.com/2024/07/10/arts/things-to-do-in-new-york-this-weekend.html



Graphic


PHOTOS: From left, Young RJ and T3 of Slum Village. They will be at SummerStage's J Dilla tribute in Brooklyn on
Friday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CARLOS OSORIO/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

From left, Kiki Mikkelsen, Katy Berry, Will Jacobs, Alyssa Davis, Adrian Frimpong and Daniel Tepper of Baby Wants
Candy. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ARIN SANG-URAI)

 Aakash Odedra, left, and Hu Shenyuan in Odedra's ''Samsara.'' (PHOTOGRAPH BY NIRVAIR SINGH RAI) This
article appeared in print on page C2.

Classification
Language: ENGLISH


Publication-Type: Newspaper


Subject: FESTIVALS (90%); JAZZ & BLUES (90%); TRENDS & EVENTS (89%); ARTISTS & PERFORMERS
(76%); MUSIC (70%); RAP MUSIC (70%); HIP HOP CULTURE (64%)


Industry: FESTIVALS (90%); ARTISTS & PERFORMERS (76%); LATE NIGHT TELEVISION (69%); HIP HOP
CULTURE (64%)


Geographic: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); NEW YORK, USA (79%)


Load-Date: July 12, 2024

                                               Page 4 of 4
                  Feel-Good Options All Over




