President Trump: Well, thank you very much, everybody. And Lee, thank you. He's been with me right from the beginning. You know, a lot of singers have wanted to introduce me. Once you win, they wanna all introduce you, you know? And I said, "No way. Nobody's introduced. Only Lee. Lee's the only one can introduce me." Thank you.

Trump: Great honor. And friends, distinguished guests, Vice President Vance, and the proud citizens of the United States of America. Welcome to the first ever midterm convention of any party. Took a little imagination to think of it, but we thought of it. I'm sure it'll become a staple in the years to come, but this is the first ever for any party.

Trump: Two months ago, we came together to celebrate one of the most glorious days in history, the 250th anniversary of our Declaration of Independence. And in 1776, our founders lit the immortal flame of American liberty in Philadelphia. What a time that was tonight. We gather in the great state of Texas. And by the way, I have to brag, it's a state I won all three times in massive landslides and got the highest vote.

Trump: Got the highest vote in the history of Texas politics. Can you believe that? But we all hold the flame high and carry it boldly forward. We love this state and we love this country. That's all we can say. But what an honor it is to be in Texas. What a place. What a place. Love it. With your support, we will make our nation stronger, safer, richer, freer, and greater than it has ever been before.

Trump: It's what's happening. You know, that's what's happening. I wish that fake news would report it. There they are. Boy, that's a lot of fake news. Look at it. That's a lot of fake news. You have to remember, when we originally announced this eight weeks ago, they said, "Who's gonna go to a midterm convention? That's never gonna --"

Trump: This place is packed. And not only is this packed, is a big arena, not only is this packed, but you have an equal number of people standing outside. If anybody would like to give up their seat or whatever they're, whatever, if they're standing or if they have a seat, would anybody like to raise your hand and give up your seat?

Trump: I -- [Audience members call out, inaudibly]

Trump: -- no, we have an amazing response. They love our party. They love what we're doing. In 55 days, Americans will be going to the polls in one of the most important elections in our country's history. Your vote will decide whether our country stumbles at the starting gate of the next 250 years or surges forward and never ever looks back. [Audience responds "No"]

Trump: If we hand America's future to the radical left democrats and our nation will spend the next decade just getting back at its feet, it will be a tragedy. Vote Republican and we will leave the world in our dust for generations to come. There'll be nothing like it. We're right at that gate. [Audience chants "USA"]

Trump: Thank you. [Audience chants "USA"]

Trump: The choice in this election is very, very simple. Democrats are asking you to vote for their failed far left agenda. It's never worked, that destroyed your finances and delivered you four years of disaster bedlam and death under sleepy Joe Biden. And I'm asking you to let us finish the job we began with the greatest two years in the history of the presidency.

Trump: This has been the most successful two years financially and every other way in the history of the presidency. And together we will turn a 2-year, come back into a 250-year lead. We've never, nobody's ever had a start. It's not even two years, but we have more money being spent from outside countries and companies over $20 trillion.

Trump: That's five, six, seven times higher than any country, not just here, any country ever. 20 over 20, remember I've been saying 19.2, but now it's over 20 for less than two years, substantially less than two years. When the two-year number comes out, that number could be $25 trillion being invested here. The record, by the way, think of it, over 20 trillion.

Trump: The record, by the way, is another foreign land. You probably know the land I'm talking about. In fact, the head of that land will be coming to the White House in two weeks. Three trillion. So three trillion versus 20 trillion, but the 20 trillion, after two years, is gonna close to 23, 24, 25. Nobody's ever seen anything like it ever, and it probably will never happen again.

Trump: And I want you to remember me in four or five years when this country's rocketing. Remember, I'm the one that got it started. [Audience members call out "Trump 2028"]

Trump: You know who they are, right? Oh, look who we have. Front row Joes. Look at 'em. Wow. That's great. And we have the great ladies from North Carolina. Can you imagine? So they've been to 217 rallies. They're beautiful. They have wonderful husbands, but I never see the husbands. The husbands, I think you're driving your husbands crazy.

Trump: No, they've been fans right from the beginning, of our policy. I guess they're like me, but of our policy. And front row Joes, it's number 412, I think. What do they do for a living? They make a lot of money, I think. But you guys are fantastic. Thank you very much. And we have a special guest, Mr. Wall.

Trump: I wanna get a suit like that. Someday I'm gonna go out and get a suit like that. Where do you get it? Now walk up here, 'cause we built over --

Blake Marnell: Gonna submit the form.

Trump: Think of this. We built over 1,400 miles of wall right on your Texas border. 1,400, and because of that, we have the great, the greatest numbers ever on immigration. We stopped it cold. It was a disaster. It was destroying our country, but we'll get onto that. When I'm on the ticket, Republicans always do very well.

Trump: We won the presidency three times, and we won't, w- -- by the way, now you notice, uh, numerous people on the other side are actually admitting it. How about that? But this was a cool way of doing it. But we won it big, and we also won everything else, because you know, whatever it is, I was on the ticket.

Trump: People came and they did tremendously with the senators, and with the congressmen. But for some reason, when a president wins, even if he's really a good president, or a great president, there aren't too many of them, they don't win the midterms, and nobody quite knows why. It's two out of, think of it, two out of 25 races.

Trump: We're gonna change that. There's no reason for it. There's no reason for it. It's something deep down and psychological. You're gonna have to explain it, but, uh, I've asked people, what is the reason for it? You, if you have a president that's doing a great job, I don't think anybody's ever had two years like we have.

Trump: All over the world, they're admitting it. Other countries are failing, and failing badly. But I say, why is it that no matter how well you're doing, we seem, not a president, Democrat or Republican, almost never wins the midterms. We've gotta change that, because we have something going that's so good, we can't let that string be broken.

Trump: So I'm asking you to pretend that I'm on the ballot. I'm on the ballot. I'm on the ballot. Just one more time, because if we lose, you're going to lose your border, you're going to lose your tax cuts, you're going to lose your safety and security, you're going to lose your wealth. Our country is going through hell.

Trump: You will be going through hell just like you did just two years ago. We went through hell. We were a laughingstock all over the world. We were laughing, they don't laugh at us anymore, do they? They don't laugh. But that's what would happen. The pundits, the fake news media and the radical left communists will say anything they can to try and stop us. But in this election, all that matters is that we are united, we are together, and what we say counts.

Trump: That's all that matters. And on November 3rd, the great American majority is going to stand up and continue to make America great again. And we will make our voices heard, perhaps like never before. That's the beautiful challenge, that the midterms are not supposed to be won by the sitting president. And we're going to change that, and we'll make it an even more important time in our country and presidency.

Trump: It'll be something very special. We have to do it. And you know, we have a very short period of time, and we really have 35 races. They all count, but we have 35 races that are, I guess you'd call the swings, right? Like we had seven swing states. We won all seven, right? Now, so I said, not that I'm looking for the work.

Trump: You know, I said the other day, I've just got so much of a schedule, I said, "I though I won. What do I have to do? I'm campaigning." But I am. We're campaigning to make it incredible, to really make it great, and to keep it great. So I am going to visit, and you have so many of those great senators, and I said, "You know, the ones I want here, we have some that are leading by 30 points and they've been there for 25 years." I said, "But don't come, please.

Trump: Don't come." The ones we need are the ones that you've heard, the ones that are very close, they might be winning by a little, or losing by a little, or tied. We can win every one of those races, but I'm gonna go to every one of those states for congressmen and for senators. I'm gonna do that. And we're gonna have rallies. [Audience chants "USA"]

Trump: And we're gonna have rallies just like this. We're gonna have big arenas loaded up with people. So the senators, they're great people, so many just great people. Their policies are, you know, they're common sense. I heard so many of the wonderful politicians that spoke. I watched a lot of them, and they talked about common sense.

Trump: It's really about common sense more than anything else. It's not about the stupid policies that led us down the drain. We were going down the drain. If we hadn't won the last election, I'm not sure that our country right now would even exist. It was going so bad. So I'm gonna go to every one of them, about 35. In a couple of cases, I'll go twice.

Trump: And I'll do, I'll do tele-town halls, and I'll be coming back to Texas because we have to elect Ken Paxton. We have to. We have to elect him. And if I have to, I'll come back twice or three times. I'll be, you'll say, "Get this guy out of here. Get him out." You're gonna be saying, "Get him the hell outta here.

Trump: He's here too much." [Laughter] No, I'll come once, or twice, or three, I'll come whatever's, we have to elect Ken Paxton together. We're gonna continue to have, we have the strongest borders now. In the history of our country, we've never had anything. We have to have strong borders. We have to continue low taxes.

Trump: I gave you the biggest tax decrease in the history of our country, and no crime. We want no crime. We don't want crime. We'll have American energy independence, something you know a lot about in Texas, and even we will have energy dominance. We will stand with our heroes in the military, our veterans. We love our veterans, and we take care of our veterans, 94%. And our great police and law enforcement, we love our police and law enforcement.

Trump: And above all, we'll, and I think it's so important because there is a crazy little sick cloud over our country. I, I really believe it's not going anywhere, but we have to make sure, because we will defeat communism in America, and vote for American freedom. We will just vote very simply for American freedom.

Trump: And a big part of that American freedom is gonna be electing Ken. We have to elect him. He's really something special. The fact is, in some, and I have to say this about Ken, it's so insulting, and I hope he doesn't get insulted, they said, "Sir, you can't say that." I said, "I have to." [Laughter] They didn't even put it on the teleprompter, but I don't use the teleprompter that much. [Laughter] They said, "Sir, you can't say it. You just, please, it's not good." But I said it once before, and he went through the roof.

Trump: I gotta say it again. So they just said how wonderful he is, and how we have to, but I, I said it a little differently because the fact is that some may not like the way he dresses. I don't. [Laughter] Although tonight he looked very spiffy in his blue suit, I must tell you. [Laughter] But the, they may not like the way he talks.

Trump: They, I can see that, you know, not everybody -- [Laughter] -- a lot of people don't like the way I talk either, but we do get crowds. There's no question. [Audience members call out "We love it" and "We love you"]

Trump: And then they say, "You can't say this, sir. It's so insulting. Please, sir." [Laughter] These are my analysts that get a lot of money for telling me a lot of nonsense. [Laughter] "Sir, please don't, sir." So I talked about dress. I talked about talk. And I even said this, but, you know, some people don't like the way I look either.

Trump: You may not like the way he looks. [Laughter] But here's the news, in the history of Texas, he is the single greatest attorney general you've ever had, and maybe the top attorney general in the whole United States. So I am very sorry, Ken. I hated to do it. And I'll go backstage, "Sir, you shouldn't have said that.

Trump: You've given them a soundbite." But let me tell you, it's true, he may not dress right, he may not talk exactly perfectly, and he may not be the best looking guy I've ever seen -- [Laughter] -- but you know what he is? He's the greatest attorney general in America and he deserves to be your next senator. I'm sorry, Ken.

Trump: Where the hell is he? [Laughs] I'm so sorry. He'll never speak to me again, but that's okay. [Laughter] We have to allow. But he's a great guy and I, I know for a fact because he fought with us so much. He took us, he, we have the wall because of him. We have so many victories because of Ken. We didn't have the wall, we'd be overrun instead of having zero.

Trump: You know, we had zero for the last, zero people for the last 16 months. Can you believe it? We had 25 million come in under Biden. Zero. But you know what? Without the wall that he was instrumental, along with Greg Abbott, by the way. And by the way -- and by the way, both senators, both senators, see?

Trump: I'm being very nice. [Laughter] Ted Cruz worked very hard on the wall and so did John Cornyn. So did John Cornyn. They both did. Both senators. We had a lot of support, but without the wall, you know, we built this massive, beautiful, great wall, beautiful because it works, we could never have the numbers that we have, which is right now, think of it, and these are made up by Democrats, the people that do these statistics, zero illegal aliens have entered our country from the southern border in the last 15 months.

Trump: Zero. So the Democrats. [Audience chants "USA"]

Trump: So the "dumocrats", as I call them, that was the other thing. They said, "Sir, don't use, this is a very important speech." [Laughter] I said, "Is it of the importance of State of the Union?" They said, "Maybe not." Although I like this arena very much. But they said, "Please, please, you know, State of the Union, you have a diverse state." That's much easier to do than what I do. Believe me, that's easy to do. Ladies and gentlemen, it's an honor to be your president.

Trump: Thank you. [Laughter] And you do that for about an hour and then everybody's falling asleep. This is a much, this is a much harder routine, let me tell you. [Laughter] But we're also out here to have a little bit of fun. So, and I just came up. I can't believe it's been, I've been doing this for, like, 10 years.

Trump: It just came up, which isn't long of your president, to be honest with you. A lot of guys over there, they're a lot, they're a hell of a lot longer, they're not president, they're my friends. I let them know that all the time, by the way. [Laughter] But I just came up with it a couple of months ago and I said, "You know, you take out the E and you replace it with a U." [Audience member calls out "That's right."]

Trump: And nobody knows that dumb has a B at the end of it. Most think, most people think it's D-U-M and that's fine. [Laughter] So we take out the E, we replace it with a U, and they're "dumocrats" because their policy is so bad. It's so bad. And I usually don't like talking about how bad. Like for instance, men playing in women's sports, okay? [Audience boos]

Trump: And I don't like to do it much before the election. I like to wait about a week before the election. I'm doing it much too early because I'm petrified that they'll change. And they'll say, "You know what? Men should not be playing in women's sport." And that will really hurt us. That's one of our great sound bites of all time.

Trump: And I thought after we won in a landslide in the last election, they would change that, but I saw two senators and a congressman in the last week and a half on television fighting like hell for men to play in women's sports. And I hope they continue to do that. [Audience boos]

Trump: They say it's an 80/20 issue. I say it's a 99 to one, and I have no idea who the one is. I have no idea. You saw the two great fighters. I was so honored to have them, world champions. And I watched them for a little while and I was gonna ask, Bo Nickal hasn't been defeated in years and Justin Gaethje who's unbelievable, you saw that fight at the White House.

Trump: It was the most violent fight. I've said, uh, "Justin, Bo, come here a minute. Do you have any fear of fighting a particular woman?" They didn't even -- [Laughter] -- he didn't, they didn't even know what the hell I was talking about. [Laughter] They said, "What's wrong with this guy asking me such a stupid question?" [Laughter] Anyway, we love the women.

Trump: It's actually -- very demeaning what they're doing to women, if you wanna know the truth. Very demeaning. So the "dumocrats" gave us the worst and most dangerous border in American history with 25 million illegal aliens pouring in. Can you imagine? 25 million illegal aliens pouring in totally unchecked, unvetted, including gang members, human traffickers, child predators, 1,000. Think of this.

Trump: We had thousands, 11,888 murderers, and you've heard me say this 'cause that's the exact number. 11,888 murderers, many of whom, over 50% killed more than one person. They allowed them to come into the country. I guess, they think they're gonna reform. They're gonna be wonderful people. They'll be the head of a bank someday.

Trump: But today, we have the strongest and most secure border in our country's history. And you saw the numbers. They came out just last week. We have the lowest level of illegal immigration ever recorded in our country. And as I said in the past, exactly 16 months, these are government stats. This is not Donald Trump.

Trump: This is government, although I think I have more credibility than government. But in the past 16 months, a historic record of zero done by Democrats, mostly a couple of Republicans, I guess, but done by Democrats, zero illegal aliens have been admitted into the United States through your border on Texas in Texas.

Trump: And therefore, zero have been admitted into Texas where they used to be running around, running rampant, killing people, they're destroying many houses and farms, and ruining property values, and creating havoc all over the state of Texas. You know that. I watched so often where they're interviewing people on the border and long beyond the border, hundreds of miles away from the border, and their farm, their houses was overrun.

Trump: And I saw a program last week where they were interviewing a man who was on a show, one of the shows. I don't want to say 'cause it's a terrible show on, on a terrible network, but they're all sort of terrible, you know, they're all fake, a lot of fake news. I couldn't believe it. In fact, they're probably gonna fire the producer of that segment.

Trump: They went to him and they said, "How was it before?" They said, "It was horrible. I was living in hell. But since President Trump got elected, we haven't had one single incident. Nobody's charging our house. Nobody's holding us up. Nobody's threatening to beat us up." He said, "It's like," it's a very good statement actually, he said, "It's like we're living in a different country between now and two years ago." And we know that.

Trump: But we've designated the cartels, as you know, as foreign terrorist organizations, something which no other president had the courage to do. And we're using our military force to totally decimate them. You probably noticed that the flow of fentanyl coming across our border's down 67%. And fentanyl and other drugs coming in through the oceans and the seas, and most importantly, the Gulf of America. [Audience chants "USA"]

Trump: Thank you. By the way, you know, I just put out, because you know Lake Ontario, we're gonna call that now Lake America, you know that. Although maybe it's gonna work out. Canada very much wants to make a deal. They're dying to make a deal. But it's gonna be called Lake America. The, uh, other one we came up with today, well, we could go into oceans like the Pacific Ocean or the Atlantic.

Trump: We can't have both. I don't think you can do both, that's true. But we did come up with one the other day which we think is appropriate. You have a neighboring state, New Mexico. We think it should be called New America, New America. New America. I'll tell you, the people love the idea. I don't know about the, the radical left I'm sure doesn't like it, but the people love it. New America, your neighbor is called New America.

Trump: But the Democrats very simply put handcuffs on our police and we put handcuffs on criminals. There's a big difference. They handcuff our police. And last year, I think you saw this, we achieved the largest drop in violent crime ever recorded the history of our country with the murder rate falling to the lowest level in 125 years, the year 1900. And that's despite the fact that, you know, we've removed tremendous numbers of people, and we focused on the bad ones, and we got some really bad, some of the worst killers you'll ever imagine.

Trump: But that's despite, despite the fact that some of these people, so many have come in, again, we've gotten a lot of them out. I can say most, but soon it will be most of them out. We're working like hell to get them the hell out of here. But that's despite the lowest murder rate since the year 1900, that's big stuff.

Trump: That's long before my father was born. I had a great father. He was born after that number. He never liked talking about age, so he's looking down at me saying, "Why do you have to mention that for, son?" Our predecessors killed and buried the American Dream with trillions of dollars in waste and green energy scams, the greatest scams in American history: green energy.

Trump: They didn't even know. Most of them had no idea what it was. They just said, "Let's go green." And every country that's gone green is down the tubes, you do know that. But it caused prices to skyrocket. They used the word affordability. Right? It's fake. They, they are so fake, because it was them that caused the affordability, to use their word, crisis.

Trump: And I'm bringing the prices way down, way, way down. They caused the price, but we're fixing it. We're fixing it. Now, my first time, if you remember, I was, uh, I won the election, and then, uh, January 20th, you take office, and I had my first news conference, like, on January 21st. And those people right there, recognized many of them, the fake news, and they started screaming.

Trump: They started screaming at me. It's a word they use, affordability. They said, "What about affordability?" And I said, "What about affordability? Tell me." They said, "Eggs are up four times since your administration." I said, "Well, I didn't really know that. I just got here like today. It's my second day." By the way, through Brooke, who you just saw speak, we got, we got eggs down lower than during my administration.

Trump: And food prices and almost every other item are rapidly going down. And by the way, oil will be going down as soon as we win the war with Iran, which is taking place right now. We'll win it. We're winning it. We control the Hormuz Strait. I think we should call the Hormuz Strait, we should call it the Trump Strait.

Trump: I should get something out of it. The Trump Strait. It's going to be called, ladies and gentlemen, I'll have an announcement. We'll call it the Trump Strait, and I'm sure the Iranian leadership will be thrilled with that. They'll be thrilled. I'd like to tell you it was their idea. It was not their idea.

Trump: I don't think they're too happy about, I don't think they're too happy about anything. Their country's falling apart. They've been the bully of the Middle East for 51 years, and they're not the bully anymore. Two years ago, our country was dead. Now, we're the hottest country anywhere in the world. Hottest in the world.

Trump: The stock markets, all of them, have set 80 all-time records since the election. So you're talking about a little more than a year and a half. 80 days during that period of time, the stock market has set an all-time record. And maybe very importantly, for some of the people, although they bear some relationship, the typical American's 401(k) has gone up by almost $50,000. And unemployment claims have reached the lowest level ever recorded.

Trump: I mean, we're doing well. I only wish the fake news would give us credit for what's happening. It's, there's never been anything like it. I told you about the investment. The investment in our country is record, but everything. Right now, in the United States of America, we have more people working than we have ever had before by a lot.

Trump: By a lot. The last Democrat Congress took thousands of dollars out of your pocket. Our Republican Congress, and by the way, we have, I think we'll go down as the greatest Speaker of the House in the history, in the history of our country, Mike Johnson. Now, he's amazing. Think of it. He's got a majority of three.

Trump: And three of them aren't the best people, I will tell you. And we just get approving, approval. We get more stuff, including the great Big Beautiful Bill, the greatest bill maybe ever passed. Thank you, Mark. Great job. He's a fine person too. And John Thune is here from the Senate. Where's John? Where's John?

Trump: No, no. John is, John is working hard. He's got great opposition. He's got great opposition from the Democrat, Schumer and these guys, they're terrible. Got great opposition. He's working very hard. He's gonna, he's gonna have, he's gonna have great success, you watch. Gonna have. We are going to have great, great success with our Republican senators.

Trump: And by the way, we have great, we have great Republican senators. David, thank you for being here. Eric, thank you for being here. I'm looking at our people over there. Thank you all for being here. We appreciate it. But our Republican Congress puts thousands of dollars into the pockets of working families with the largest tax cuts in the history of our country.

Trump: So we had the largest in history. We gave you no tax on tips, no tax on overtime, and no tax on social security for our great seniors. And that's done. That's done. And we also made interest payments. Think of this. People go out, they buy a car, they borrow money. Many people borrow money. And we got tax deductibility of your interest payment all against your income tax.

Trump: And people are loving it and they're using it. And it's great for our car industry, which is, by the way, setting new records. We're building car plants all over the United States. For 48 years, we built none. Now we're building them all over. Honda's coming in, building one of the biggest in the world. Toyota's building one of the biggest in w- -- General Motors is going wild.

Trump: Ford is go- -- they're all doing great. It's like the golden age of America. It's the golden age of the automobile business. But that interest is tax-deductible. But what's the caveat? Only if the car is made in America. With the help of our great energy workers here in Texas, our country is producing more oil and gas today than ever before, now listen to this, more than Russia and Saudi Arabia combined.

Trump: How about that? And you remember during the, during the campaign, I love that campaign. It was so, but I loved the second one too. I love that one too. But they cheat. We can't let that happen. They cheat. That's why we wanna pass the Save America Act to stop the China. And we will. And we will. We will.

Trump: We will. We will. You know, um, we have tremendous opposition because you know what they're talking about. They're talking about, we want voter ID, voter identification. Ideally, ideally we want it with a photo so that when I see Tim Scott, who made a great speech tonight by the way, I watched everything.

Trump: Senator Tim Scott, South Carolina. So when he speaks, I won't get him mixed up with, let's see who's over there, with Scott Bessent. Okay? I want a photo ID so Tim and Scott don't get mixed up. Now the only reason the Democrats are fighting us on voter ID, and you know what the second is? Proof of citizenship, okay?

Trump: So the only reason they're fighting us is because they want to cheat. There's no other reason. But you have to admit, they're really good at this stuff. They'll, they come up with more excuses. They say, "It's important not to have a voter ID because it's extraordinarily difficult for some people." It's, they have more bullshit than any human beings on the planet.

Trump: So they're fighting us 100%, think of it, of the Democrats voted against voter ID and 100% of the Democrats, 100%. And you know the Democrat voters actually like it. It polls at 87% for the whole voting public. 100% of the Democrats voted against all these things, tax cuts, everything else. But they voted against voter ID and they voted against proof of citizenship.

Trump: Like, "Sir, excuse me, sir. Uh, are you a citizen of the United States?" "It's none of your business. I'm voting." Can you believe this? 100%. And most Republicans, most, not quite all, you'll have to check them out, but not quite all, but most Republicans, almost all Republicans voted for it, but we have a huge, a huge block.

Trump: It's the Democrats. They don't wanna have voter ID. They don't wanna have proof of citizenship. I think it's a disgrace. But getting back to oil, okay? We, we, you are doing, and as I said, you're the biggest, we're now the biggest in the world. We were nowhere near that. Now you're, we're the biggest in the world.

Trump: And that's without Venezuela, which we've just added to our little stockpile. It's, it's the biggest oil deal and probably it's the biggest deal in the history of our country. 65 billion barrels are ours and you know what they say it is? Lifetime? 500 years. And you know, in Venezuela, you know how you find the oil?

Trump: You know the way Exxon and Chevron, they go around looking, they hire these geniuses, they pay millions of dollars, they spend millions and millions for equipment. They go all over the world looking, they can't find it. In Venezuela, what you do is the following. You look on the ground and you see ground that's soaking wet with oil and you say, "Let's build our rig right there." There's really nothing like it. And we have a great relationship.

Trump: But by the way, I'd like to thank Pete Hegseth and I'd like to thank, I'd like to thank General King. Where is General King? I'd like to thank, they're here someplace. This is our big room. This place is packed. Do you think the fake news, you know what they're gonna do? The fake news will go around and see that man up there?

Trump: He's leaving for the bathroom. He'll be back in two minutes. Up in the, they'll take a picture of his seat while he's gone. And they'll say, "Trump did not fill up the arena. The arena was not filled. Look at the seat. So please, if you don't mind, don't anybody go to the bathroom because --" No, we had it recently.

Trump: So Darlene Graham, Lindsay, we loved Lindsay. We, look, Lindsay was a great guy. Good guy. And he's looking down and he's smiling, but he was a good guy and he has a great sister, but she never did politics before, and we had a rally in South Carolina and it was great. It was this really, thank you, right?

Trump: And it was this really big, it was this really beautiful, big arena, but it was, you know, more of like a convention area. And not that big from the standpoint of like this, this is a big Dallas Mavericks team, which is gonna be hopefully good. I don't understand. I must tell you, I don't understand the trade.

Trump: That trade is not, what do I know about basketball? I would say that was not gonna, it's not gonna go down as the greatest trade in the history of sports. It might go down as the worst trade in the history of sports. No, actually, okay, you know the worst trade in the history of sports, right? The great Babe Ruth.

Trump: Babe Ruth, 19-year-old pitcher for a 36-year-old, third baseman and $100,000. At that time, that was like $10 million, I guess, because Boston needed money. So Babe will always be the worst trade. But, uh, is it Luka? That's not good. That wasn't good. Maybe we could redo that trade. I redo deals all the time.

Trump: We gotta redo. We gotta redo that deal. I don't get that deal. You know, some deals you understand. I understand deals, but that one I didn't quite get. Somebody from Dallas, I'm sure, can explain it to me. But with Venezuela, Texas, Oklahoma, North Dakota, Pennsylvania, our great senator, David, thank you.

Trump: And all of our other incredible states. We're more powerful now than OPEC and prices right after this very important election on November 3rd will be plummeting. The world will be over very shortly after the election. They're hanging out for dear life, hoping that we lose so they can deal with dumb, weak Democrats and they can have their nuclear bomb, but we're not gonna let that happen.

Trump: So they're going to be quitting or dropping out or who knows what the hell, whatever it is, right after election day, because they want to deal, desperately want to deal with Democrats like Obama, Barack Hussein Obama. Have you heard of him? Barack Hussein Obama made a deal JCPOA, one of the worst deals in the history.

Trump: It was a road to a nuclear weapon for Iran or Sleepy Joe. Sleepy Joe gave them everything. They thought they could buy their way into a deal and instead they used all the money they got to create nuclear weapons, and they got very close. And if we didn't hit them, two things. If I didn't cancel the JCPOA, and if we didn't hit them with our beautiful, the wing, our beautiful B2 bombers, they would have a nuclear weapon right now and I would be addressing them as Supreme Leader. "Mr. Supreme Leader, sir, how are you?" And now I don't have to do that.

Trump: If they had a nuclear weapon, I'd be calling the Supreme Leader and I'd be saying, "Mr. Supreme Leader, how are you, sir? Is there anything we can do for you?" As opposed to bombing the crap out of them. We cannot let Iran have a nuclear weapon. It's very simple. We cannot let them have a nuclear weapon.

Trump: You know, I, I decided to do this. We had the best reports that our country has ever had. And I went to Scott Bessent, I went to Howard, I went to all our guys, I said, "You know, I'm sorry to do this to you. We just announced record our stock market hit records." By the way, our stock market's much higher today than it was when I first did the attack, just so you know.

Trump: But our stock market hit records. We were doing great, and oil was low. I was in Iowa. The oil was at $1.85 a gallon for cars. There was another one, 1.95, but I saw that last one 1.85. We were doing great. I called them all into the office. I said, "Fellas, I hate to do this to you. We have the best records we've ever had, but we have a country that's two, maybe three weeks away from having a nuclear weapon, and it's the state sponsor of terror all over the world considered just about the most evil country.

Trump: We cannot let them have a nuclear weapon." And a couple of them, including Scott, who's a great financial guy, "Sir, is there any time we could do it later maybe, sir?" "You think you could hold off in this a little bit, sir? "I said," No, because if we don't hit them now, they're gonna have a nuclear weapon within one month." You know, the places we bombed would've been turned into nuclear, nuclear weapons.

Trump: I call it nuclear dust right now, but the nuclear dust could get very violent. And we hit them really hard. We did an amazing job. Those B2 bombers came in from Missouri, from Missouri. The home of Eric Schmidt came in from, from the great state of Missouri. They flew for 37 hours back and forth. They refueled four times up in the air, and they bombed the hell out of him, and they knocked him out.

Trump: And we may have to do it. There's another place called Pickaxe Mountain, another nice place. We may have to give them a shot there too, because somebody said there was a little movement at the site. We don't need much. We see every, you know, because of the Space Force, which was my baby, I have to say, the first term, we can see everything.

Trump: We can see the tag on their coat. Mohamed Al-Fated, it says Mohamed. It's ne- -- never Mohamed, it's never Mohamed Jones, Mohamed's. Mohamed Alizuri. And it says right on his tag, we can read it from space. Can you believe this? Thousands of miles away and we're reading somebody's -- we know exactly what's going on, but we notice there's a little activity at Pickaxe.

Trump: Uh, I would advise Iran not to get cute, because we will have to hit them very hard. We have no choice, right? We have no choice. Does anybody here think that Iran should have a nuclear weapon? Anybody? Who feels Iran should not have a nuclear weapon? You know, it happens to me all the time. Guys come up, "You know, I wish you didn't do the war in Iran.

Trump: Gasoline's up," ba, ba, ba. And I say, "Well, let me ask you just smart people. Let me ask you," not too many of them, by the way. Let me ask you one question. Can Iran have a nuclear weapon? Absolutely not. Well, then I'm right that I win, okay. Because, you know, for 51 years, they always say 47, but, you know, I've been saying that for four years.

Trump: For 51 years, people have been trying to, and other presidents have been trying to talk them out of it, but they don't understand talk, these people. They don't understand. They only understand one thing and that's, they're getting plenty of it. Between our Venezuelan oil deal, all of our new mineral deals, trillions and trillions of dollars that were taken in with my most favorite word, but now I moved it to fifth place, you know, is that right?

Trump: Because the press, for the few people that haven't heard this story, tariff. I said, "Tariff is my favorite word in the whole dictionary." My favorite. I love the word. And I said that at one of the big rallies I had a while ago. Tariffs are my favorite word. It's gonna make America rich. It's making us much richer than we ever thought, but we're taking in trillions of dollars.

Trump: Okay. But I said, "Tariff is my favorite word." And the fake news went crazy. They said, "What about love? What about wife? What about God, religion, family?" So I moved tariff down to fifth. [Laughter] And now I'm okay. Now I'm okay. They've been leaving me alone. Oh, they hit me hard. They hit me hard.

Trump: They said, "Tariff. What about religion?" So I moved it to fifth and now they've been pretty good. I'm surprised they didn't move me deeper. But trillions of dollars in tariff revenue have come in and record investments from foreign countries and our enormous new equity stakes and major companies. I did something, I'm getting killed for it. Intel.

Trump: Intel is a good, really good company. But what happened is stupid presidents allowed the chip business to leave our country and go to Taiwan. And stupid. All they had to do was put tariffs on and they wouldn't have left. In other words, Taiwan, you're gonna sell chips to America, you gotta pay 100%, gotta pay 200%, 50% anything.

Trump: And you wouldn't have had, but they didn't do that until I came along. And what happened is Intel became old and tired and got in trouble. And they came to see me, the head of Intel was a nice man actually. And he said, "Sir, I need your help." And he said, "Why?" Whatever it was. And I said, "Well, you came to the right place.

Trump: I'm the only one that can help you." I was there with Scott and Howard Lutnick, our commerce secretary. He's doing a good job and a couple of others. I said, "I'm the only one that can, I'm the only one that can help you." I said, "Here's a deal. Give the United States of America 10% of Intel." Now they're, think it was worth like $120 billion.

Trump: You know, it lost its way, but it's still worth a lot of money. I say, "Give the United States of America 10% of Intel and I'll get this problem solved for you." He stood up immediately and he said, "You have a deal." And I said, "I should have asked for more." [Laughter] It was true. I said to my guys, "What the hell's wrong with me?" But anyway, I shook his hand, but that was worth 12 billion.

Trump: So in one meeting, I picked up 12 billion. But what's happened, well, that's, that's not even the good part because what happened to Intel is amazing. It like became the number one stock on the exchange. Various exchanges by the way. And I don't know, I see Scott up there. He made a great speech by the way.

Trump: I see Scott. Scott, how many times has it doubled and tripled and quadrupled? What's it now, Scott? How much is it worth?

Tim Scott: Five.

Trump: He said five times.

Scott: Five.

Trump: No, it's worth like, I think we made a $60 billion profit, something like that. If I'm wrong, they'll say, if I'm wrong, they'll say, "Horrible." So let me lower the number just because if I'm wrong, they'll say, "He exaggerated the number," but it went up like four or five times. We made 50 or $60 billion in just a number of months.

Trump: And it's one of the hottest stocks on the stock exchanges 'cause it's numerous exchanges and more than one. And it's, uh, been amazing. Do I get credit for it? No. Do I get credit for building a ballroom with my money where I have, I'm the only one. I build a ballroom. No money, no tax. I don't want tax money.

Trump: I don't want anything. It's me and a bunch of patriots. They put up lots of money to build this, which is desperately needed. And it's gonna be beautiful. And everyone's gonna say, "Oh, thank God." No, it's gonna be beautiful. Zero tax dollars for the ballroom, zero tax dollars. And what happens? I get criticized.

Trump: It's the most incredible thing. Anybody else would do that, they'd say, "What a nice gesture." So I'm giving you a ballroom free of charge, okay? That's all I can tell you. And it will be the most beautiful ballroom anywhere in the world. It'll be the best. And it's, by the way, drone proof, bulletproof, everything proof.

Trump: It's got glass this thick, six inches thick. It's gonna be great. It's gonna be a little safer than the place that we happen to have that little White House correspondence. Do you remember that? That was that, that was not the safest feeling. This is gonna be great, but we give it to you tax-free and I hope you enjoy it. You know, the other thing is that I'm only gonna get to use it a few months.

Trump: It's gonna be built. We're on time. We're under budget actually and ahead of schedule and I'll only get to use it, people forget. You know, they say, "He's building a ballroom for himself." No, I'll be there for a few months. It's like, I'd love to have it for a long time. But they've wanted a ballroom at the White House presidents for 150 years.

Trump: You know, we have the president of China coming in two weeks who's, you know, I'm, I get along great with him. We have a very good, that's better. You know, it's a good thing, not a bad thing. Some people say, "Oh, it's terrible." That's a very good thing. But we have like 101 people. We could have 2,000 people.

Trump: I could have this whole stadium would like to go there. So we're building something that's going to be the most beautiful anywhere in the world. When I was in China, they have a building, it's called the Great Hall of China. It's a serious hall. This is a very large hall, but we're gonna top it, you know?

Trump: We're gonna top it. And it's gonna be at the White House and all these presidents to come, hopefully mostly Republicans, but Democrats also are gonna be very thankful that they have it. And it's gonna be an honor to, to do it. And I just wanna say that the radical left Democrats will not have and could not have, and this is very important because I'm getting to maybe, maybe what will be the best part of the speech.

Trump: So while I, because I love the weave. You know what the weave is? You talk about something, then you bring in a ballroom or you bring in an airplane or you bring in Air Force One. But you notice I always get right back to the same topic. Now -- [Audience members call out "We love Melania"]

Trump: -- when I don't come back, she's great. He loves, he says, "I love Melania." She's doing a good job. So when, someday there'll be a time when I do the weave is weave, weave. Someday there'll be a time when I don't get back to the original subject and then you can say he's had it. Okay? You can say then he's had it. But what we're doing is because we've done so well and because our country is making so much money that only I can make this promise to you, and here is my promise.

Trump: If the Republicans win the House of Representatives and the United States Senate, both of them, because of our economic, tremendous economic success, like in, in history, we've never had anything like what's happening, but because of our tremendous strength and success economically, I will issue a dividend to every adult citizen in the United States of America for $5,000. Very much like a successful company will do a cash distribution to its shareholders or like last year when I gave our great members of the military $1,776. Remember?

Trump: I gave it to our military $1,776. Can you believe the number was 1775, and I said, "You know, if we add $1, we're at 1776, can you --" I said, "Did anybody think of that?" No. But we gave our great military $1,776 and they are thrilled. Every time I see them, they thank me. But this is what we're doing and it was greatly appreciated just like I did with the Trump accounts for children where young people, children, and many of them born into poverty or families with very little money or future will be potentially rich when they turn 18 or 21. Think of it. Their family won't have much money, but the government is putting $1,000 into an account for beautiful babies born.

Trump: But in many cases, they're born into poverty. They're born poor. They're born not rich, but they get $1,000 and we do matching funds and all sorts of things. And Michael and Susan Dell, he put up. Think of this. He put up $6,250,000,000. So far he's the large, anybody in the room like to challenge that number and put up a little?

Trump: So go out and buy his computers. He's a very good guy. Now they'll say, "Oh, he's making a political --" I'm not making a, the guy gave us $6,250,000,000 and he did that not because he had to, because he really wanted to do it. And children are gonna turn 18 or 19 or 20 or 21. They're gonna have an account.

Trump: And if the market is good, like if the market's like today, they become quite rich at a very young age instead of having no money whatsoever. It's an amazing thing and very popular. We have other people, by the way, we have other rich people. They took the entire state. Somebody put up the entire state of Indiana putting up money for every child born in the entire state.

Trump: Brad, thank you very much. But the only condition on the payment of this dividend that we're going to be making, so it's $5,000 to every adult. The only caveat I have is that the dividend that we're making must be spent in the United States of America. We don't want you, we don't want you going to Canada to spend the money.

Trump: We don't want you going to China, to Germany. You got to spend the money in the United States of America. In other words, if the Republicans win, if you win, we might not win. The reason the Democrats can't do that is because they don't do tariffs, they don't take in money. All they know is poverty and how to ruin our country, but we're making a fortune.

Trump: So if the Republicans win, you win with us and you get $5,000. It will be called the Trump dividend. We'll call it the Trump dividend. Congratulations. Now all we have to do, now all we have to do is win. Under my leadership, we also made our historic most favored nation agreements on drug prices. Nobody thought it was possible.

Trump: For decades, Americans paid the highest prices for prescription drugs anywhere in the world. We paid the highest drug prices in the world. And now, because of what I did with Bobby Kennedy, who's over there, with Dr. Oz, who's over there. Stand up, Bobby. Thank you. Bobby, Dr. Oz, we have a great group. So we went from the highest prices by far in the world, and now we pay the lowest prices in the entire world for prescription drugs.

Trump: And nobody wants to write a story about it. I'm trying to get the press. I think it's one of the biggest things to happen medically, healthcare-wise, in history. I cannot get a story out of it. I'm trying. I'm saying, "Would you please tell the people how great I am, please?" [Laughs] But I'm giving you the largest prescription drug price cuts in history with differences of 400, 500, and even 600%. Think of that.

Trump: And that alone should win the midterms, honestly. If we did nothing else, that should, because everybody said, "Other presidents tried and they failed. They weren't able to do it." But I would call countries. The big problem I got the drug companies to do, but I would call cou - but they knew that I couldn't get it from countries.

Trump: Never got. I would call France. I would call other countries. In the case of France, I would speak to President Macron. Beautiful accent. Wonderful guy. I'd say, uh, "Emmanuel, please, please, uh, do us a favor. You have to double or triple the drug prices in France, if you don't mind, because you're paying $10 for a pill and we're paying $130 for the same pill." So the concept is they'll go up somewhat and we'll come way down because the world is bigger than us, so it's disproportionate down.

Trump: So he said, "No, no, no. I will not do that, Donald. Why would I do a thing?" I said, "You have no choice. You're gonna do it." He said, "No, no, I will not do that, Donald. You don't understand. I will not do that, Mr. President." I said, "Yes, you will. I will tell you you will do it, because if you don't do it, I am putting a 150% tariff on all wines and everything else coming into the United States." And he said, "Donald, you really can't do that." I said, "Yes, I can.

Trump: I have the papers in front of me. I'm gonna sign them right now." He said, "Donald, I would love to do that." So he agreed and I had the same conversation with about 25 other countries, had to get their approval, got everybody's approval. It was there, whether it's wine, champagne, cars, it was always something.

Trump: Everybody's got a weak spot. Remember that in life. Everybody has a weak spot. I won't tell you what my weak spot is, I refuse this. [Laughs] But on the world stage, America is respected again like we have never been respected before. That I can tell you. And here at home we ended the woke madness Democrats cruelly inflicted upon America.

Trump: We abolished all of the diversity, equity, and inclusion mandates across the federal government. We made English the official language of the United States. We banned transgender ideology and critical race theory from our public schools and ended the transgender mutilization of our children. There will be no more mutilization, which is what it was of our children.

Trump: And so importantly, Will, we will not have men playing in women's sports, won't happen. And every single Democrat in Congress voted against our tax cuts. They voted against no tax on tips. This is every single one. It's incredible that Congress, the Senate, the House, that they were able to get this passed.

Trump: They voted against no tax on tips. They voted against no tax on overtime. They voted against 100%. No tax on social security for our great seniors. They want to raise your taxes on social security. They want to raise your taxes on tips. They want to take, they want to get rid of no tax on tips. They want to get rid of no tax on social security for the seniors.

Trump: They want to get rid of. Think of it. The overtime now is going wild. Companies love it. The people love it. They don't have to pay tax when they work overtime. They're working the longest hours. It's great. It's like a great incentive. They want to get rid of no tax on overtime. Every Democrat voted against funding for the Border Security Bill.

Trump: They voted against funding on everything, the wall. They voted against voter ID. They voted against proof of citizenship. They voted against funding for our military and for our vets. They voted in favor. They voted in favor of transgender everything, taxpayer funded child utilization. And they voted in favor of men playing in women's sports.

Trump: Congressional Democrats voted against the American people every single time, and now they want you to vote, yes, on handing them the majority so they can take us back. They want to take back every single thing that Republicans through a lot of really hard work and a lot of very brilliant thinking, gave you.

Trump: All of those taxes are gonna go through the roof if you put in the Democrats. So November 3rd, we will tell the radical left Democrats that we will never believe you again. We are never going back to where we were just two years ago when our country was an embarrassment. Our country was an embarrassment. [Audience chants "USA"]

Trump: No, our country was an emb- -- we had a president that couldn't walk off the stage. You know, there's so many stairs, one here, one there. He'd finish a speech. The speech has only lasted about a minute, so where am I? Where? Remember the time he walked into the wall in the back and thought it was a stair?

Trump: Couldn't sign his name on a document, autopenned everything, horrible. In this election, the Democrats have nominated the most extreme and dangerous group of candidates for the House and Senate ever to seek office. These people are radical left communists, many of them, not all of them, but many of them.

Trump: In state after state, the Democrat establishment has been overthrown and replaced by crazed lunatics and radicals. They call themselves Democrat socialists, but actually, they're communists. They're not socialists. They're long beyond socialists. Remember during the last State of the Union, I said, "Our country will never be a socialist country"? I was right.

Trump: It's gonna be a communist country if they would. You know what they did? They dropped socialism. They went right for the big one. They went right for the big one. They didn't want socialism anymore. They're crazy. They're crazy. Remember I said that during the State of the Union? I shouldn't have said it. It was very rude. [Laughter] But we're handing out the Medal of Honor to a man that landed a helicopter with his leg virtually blown off in, in Venezuela, flawlessly landed a big Chinook.

Trump: That's the double blader, big, carrying many, many soldiers. Most people would've been out. He took that helicopter, landed it perfectly. We then were able to get Maduro. If we didn't land it, we would've had a big problem. And we presented him and others, but we presented him with the Congressional Medal of Honor.

Trump: Boy, did he deserve it. And they sat there. Remember, like this? They wouldn't clap. They would, now I have to tell you though, at the end of that State of the Union, they were clapping for everything. You know why? People were calling them, saying, "You guys are being slaughtered tonight." They wouldn't clap.

Trump: Remember the 100-year-old soldier that I gave a special, a special reward to, very special, the most special? They refused to clap. He's 104 years old. They refused to clap. So some wise Democrat called them up and said, "You people are crazy. You better start clapping. He's making you --" And you know, honestly, they were clapping for everything.

Trump: I could say anything. They were clapping. They were going wild. So they went from one extreme to the other. You know why? 'Cause they're Democrats, that's why. [Laughter] But America has beaten communism before and we will beat it again. We've beaten it before. The new Democrat communists have even published a manifesto.

Trump: Do you believe it? We have a manifesto in our country. They vow to abolish the police. That makes a lot of sense. Abolish prisons, abolish the United States Supreme Court, abolish the United States senators. We have some very unhappy senators sitting right over there. [Laughter] They want to abolish ICE.

Trump: They want to abolish border patrol. And Paul, you were great tonight wherever you are, the head of border patrol. He was great. And they want to grant full amnesty and voting rights to all illegal aliens, regardless of whether they were criminals, murderers, or any other type. Everybody gets them. If you were a murderer, you get to vote.

Trump: They want to ban all oil and gas, which I would think in Texas, will give Ken a very big victory. Now, think of it, they want to ban oil and gas. I mean, we're in Texas. I mean, this guy, "Talafreako," he, this guy is terrible. They wanted to fund the United States military and lower my very high standard on healthcare for our great vets.

Trump: You know, they want to take away healthcare for our veterans. [Audience boos]

Trump: They wanna steal your money for reparations. They wanna basically punish you for crimes that you never committed that happened hundreds of years ago. And our country doesn't have that kind of money. They have the money for $5,000, but they don't have that kind of money. And give it to the people that hate our country.

Trump: The people that hate our country are asking for it, but it's going nowhere. And while, b- -- by the way, as long as you have Republicans, it's not even, it's, you know. You know, our party is really, we can say conservative, all that. Our party is really based on a thing called common sense. It's all common sense.

Trump: It's all common sense. But these are people who do not care if your country is invaded by illegal immigrants, if your home is burglarized, if your parks and city streets are turned to filth and squalor and debt, if your loved ones are pushed in front of a subway train in New York City or stabbed in the middle of a field in any state you wanna pick.

Trump: They don't care because they hate our country and they are democrats, and they're very, very wrong. On election night, we're going to prove that America does not belong to those who hate it. America belongs to those who love it. [Audience chants "USA"]

Trump: One of America's, I mean, we have so many great people here tonight. It's so sad because I'd like to mention every one of them. We have so many great senators, so many great congresspeople, but you can't. Time. One of the democrats top congressional candidates is a self describes Marxist who says he hates family households, oh, that's nice, and wants to destroy the American way of life.

Trump: These are words he used. Another quotes Karl Marx saying she wants to seize the means of production and puts the works of communist butchers like Lenin, Stalin into every library. They wanna put the books of Lenin, Lenin as they say, Lenin, Lenin and Stalin in every library for all our young children to read and study.

Trump: These are our Democrat party's nominees to wield control over the United States Congress. If they win the greatest legislative body in history, will for the first time ever be controlled by a communist caucus. They'll have a caucus of 20 people, 18 people, 10 people. That's enough to control Congress. Mike Johnson will tell you that [Laughs] we've got enough problems, right?

Trump: We have enough. We have enough, Mike. How would you feel about having 22 communists in your, in your little group? [Audience boos]

Trump: Uh, Mike says, "No, please. I, I can't." We have, it's enough problems getting people to vote who aren't good people. We have a couple of them, but mostly they're Gonzo. We take care of our bad people. We take really good care of our good people though. But we're not going to let the communism happen. Not here, not in America, not in our 250th year.

Trump: There's an example. In Florida, the Democrat nominee for Senate, Angie Nixon, no relation to Richard Nixon. I, the first thing I did, I wanted to check. Is she related at all to Richard Nixon? No. Is a card carrying member of the democrat socialists of America. In Michigan, the Democrat nominee is Abdul El-Sayed, who brags about the fact that he wants to pack the Supreme Court with 23 far left -- [Audience boos]

Trump: -- lunatics justices. His sister, who's absolutely, you got to listen to this one. His sister celebrated the terrorist slaughter of babies on October 7th. She though it was a great thing. [Audience boos]

Trump: His sister thought it was a great day. His mother worked for an organization that gave hundreds of thousands of dollars to people that follow Osama bin Laden. And he campaigns with a Marxist agitator who says that America deserved 9/11. We deserve to have 3,000 people killed. Two massive structures brought to the ground.

Trump: We deserved it, right? Yet the democrats wanna make this extremist a US senator. [Audience members respond "No"]

Trump: And running against somebody really good. He's fortunately, we have a man named Mike Rogers who's great. So on November 3rd, get out and vote for Mike Rogers. Now in North Carolina, you have a little more difficult case because people don't quite get it, but they're gonna find out. Democrats nominated Roy Cooper, who worked with anti-police radicals to release thousands and thousands of dangerous criminals and murderers all over the one safe streets and countryside of beautiful North Carolina.

Trump: My daughter-in-law, Laura, loves North Carolina. She comes from there. And last year on a train in Charlotte, you all saw it. One monster, an absolute monster with 14 prior arrests, nothing but trouble, violent person, stood up behind a beautiful 23-year-old woman, Iryna Zarutska, and slashed a knife from behind across her neck and killed her almost instantly.

Trump: Other than a look she gave up, what happened? That was her last thought. It was her last look. He was an animal, a violent killer, and everyone knew it. They all knew it. They all knew he was destined to kill. He loomed over her as the life drained from her, absolutely petrified. You've all seen it. And you don't wanna see any more than the, as horrific as anything you'll ever see.

Trump: Let that tape run. Most networks, and I give them credit for this, they wouldn't let that happen. It was violent. I, unfortunately, because of my position, I was forced to look. I did not like it. I did not like looking, and I wish I never saw it. She died on a metro train terrified and alone. Got to meet her mother at the State of the Union.

Trump: She was there. She was, it was quite a while afterwards, and the mothers, she said, "I haven't stopped crying since it took place." Never. She'll never be the same. Roy Cooper was the governor and released this animal into North Carolina society, and others that were, and others that were almost as bad.

Trump: This happened up in Massachusetts a long time ago when they released a violent criminal, and that man killed numerous women very quickly, raped and killed them right after being released. And as you know, that governor from Massachusetts was running for president, and he was leading. And as soon as that happened, he took a 10 point drop and then another 10 point and then, and he got beat in a slaughter.

Trump: That should happen to Roy Cooper because Roy Cooper, what he's done is worse. Roy Cooper released people like that can't imagine as bad, but very bad murderers all over the streets and fields of North Carolina. Did you ever see North Carolina? How Much crime they seem to have now? They never had crime. And now they wanna make him a senator.

Trump: He wants to be a senator. Roy Cooper was governor when North Carolina was hit by the worst water filled record setting hurricane. This was a hurricane of massive water, maybe the most we've ever had hit this country, water, that left the state ravaged, and he did nothing to help. He was a disaster during that very traumatic time.

Trump: And it only got fixed on January 20th when I came into office and the number one advocate, and the number one advocate and the man that called me more than anybody else, and we had great support from our congressmen Republicans, was Michael Whatley, the head of the Republican Party. He did such a good job as the head of North Carolina Republican Party that I said, "I really want.

Trump: I won North Carolina three times in a row by a lot." I said, "I really want that guy to head up the Republican Party nationally." Name is Michael Whatley. And he'll be an unbelievable. He's gonna be unbelievable. And there'll be nobody like him. I mean, he's just a winner. Roy Cooper will make North Carolina a killing field, and he's a radical left politician posing as a moderate.

Trump: In fact, he's one of the worst in the entire group, but nobody really understands it yet, but they will. And I just wanna pay my condolences to the mother of Iryna, who is living in hell right now. Her daughter would be alive today if North Carolina had a different governor, because that animal would've been in prison or worse.

Trump: He wouldn't have been let go to be on the streets and be in a train sitting right behind that beautiful young lady. So vote for Michael Whatley in North Carolina, which has become a crime-ridden state, including your new Democrat governor's doing a lousy job. So Michael Whatley will straighten things out just like he did when he ran the Republican Party in 2024, when we won a landslide election.

Trump: And here in Texas, Democrats have dominated James Talarico for the Senate. And he is a weird-looking dude. I mean, I don't like talking about looks, but there's something missing there. Remember Mad Magazine? He looks to me just like Alfred E. Neuman, right? No, he does. Alfred E. Neuman. Texas is not heavy into the world of Alfred E. He's Alfred E. Neuman, and he's a bad one.

Trump: He's bad. Talarico authored a plan to annihilate Texas oil and gas. That's good. I'm working my ass off to get you oil and gas, and I got a guy that wants to end it. Would Texas be willing to end all oil and gas drilling? [Audience members respond "No"]And watch Texas file for the equivalent of Chapter 11. You know what it's called?

Trump: Chapter 17. If a state goes bankrupt, because that's what would happen. This guy would be a disaster. And he stated that he wants to totally dismantle capitalism, dismantle "capitalism." He described himself as a person who hates Christianity. Says that God is transgender. He called the American flag a complicated symbol of hate.

Trump: Claimed that the 10 commandments are a form of fascism, and when he was asked what he loved most in the world, he said, "I love transgender children," which, he was also somebody that hated eating meat, but he ran a campaign to beat meat. He called it beat meat. I don't know what the hell he meant by that. [Laughter]

Trump: These people are gonna tell me, "What the hell is he, he wants to beat meat?" But it was bad for his image, so he started eating meat. And he recently [Laughs] .. It's getting worse. I'm getting myself in trouble. [Laughter] It's getting worse. But he was recently seen having a barbecue and eating a lot of meat. [Laughter] But that's what happened.

Trump: He ate it and then he was seen running backstage to a room and throwing up all over the place. [Laughter] He doesn't like meat. He also loved wearing masks and he was seen wearing a mask just a short number of months ago. Any guy in Texas that's wearing a mask a few months ago, this is not gonna be your senator.

Trump: It's not gonna work out. Not gonna work out. So getting back, freedom loving patriots of Texas are going to defeat Talarico, and elect Ken Paxton to protect the lodestar. All right? You know what's amazing? I'm looking at this massive crowd. It's filled all the way upstairs, all the way. There's a lot of people outside.

Trump: And watch this, nobody has left. It's a great tribute to Trump. Nobody, so, think of this. Nobody has left. And yet I'll read in The New York Times tomorrow that Trump lost his audience shortly, no, I'll read, okay. I got it. I'll read, I'll read tomorrow and some of the media, The New York Times, it's a failing, it's a failing newspaper by the way.

Trump: It's failing badly. You know why? 'Cause it has no credibility. But they'll have a reporter say, "Trump lost his audience. He didn't enjoy it up there." I do. I'm having a lot of fun. You know why? 'Cause everybody loves me, and I love everybody. So, they'll say that they started leaving. I've been speaking for an hour and 20 minutes.

Trump: Nobody's left. There's no, but they'll say, "The arena started emptying out." Or they'll say, "The arena, which was only 25% full." Really? [Laughs] Oh, really? How about those people? Now, this place is packed and outside, but I had the case, I was gonna say before, so Lindsey Graham's sister, Darline, is fantastic and she's running.

Trump: And she was behind in the polls against a very good politician, Ralph Norman, a very good politician. And she was a little behind, and I was pushing for her victory. And I went to South Carolina, and I gave a speech in a big room and it was packed. It was packed. And because of that speech, she won the election quite nicely.

Trump: She won it quite nicely. And the people, it was standing room only. The people were packed outside. And then on watching the Sunday shows last week, a creep from The New York Times said, "I was at that room and there was very little enthusiasm. President Trump didn't really wanna be there, you could see it. And the room was half empty.

Trump: Uh, the back of the room had nobody." Let me tell you, the back of the room made this one look empty. The place was packed, thousands of people outside. And here's the bottom line, because of that speech, she won. But I had to listen to a guy live from The New York Times. His name is Shawn McCreesh, something like that.

Trump: And he lied. And he said, "So just remember, we looked around, the place is packed, nobody left. Let's keep it that way because I'm almost finished, okay?" [Laughter] A vote for any Democrat this year, anywhere in the country is a vote to let a small and dangerous group of extremists hold our Congress and our country hostage.

Trump: If they win, every bill becomes a ransom negotiation. It'll be very tough. If we wanna fund the military, then we'll have to pay the Marxists who wanna destroy it. If we want a Homeland Security funding, then we'll have to pay the radicals who think we deserved, like I said, 9/11. I don't think so. [Audience boos]

Trump: With your vote in this election, you can tell these far-left lunatics and fanatics that America is not for sale to them or to anybody else. [Audience chants "USA"]

Trump: Thank you. We do not negotiate with communists, with socialists, or with radical left lunatics. We don't negotiate. The maniacs attacking our civilization think they are on this march. They're talking about, "This is a great march through our cou- --" our country's, the hottest country in the whole world.

Trump: What the hell do you want us to do? They're talking about, "We will march. We will --" everything they touch, you know one thing I notice about, even if I just talk socialism, if I talk about radical left, without even going to communism, everything, I said this once a month ago. I'd go a little off script if you don't mind.

Trump: Isn't it nice to have a president that doesn't have to use a script? Isn't that nice? Isn't that nice? But one thing I noticed about the radical left, like the cities, the blue cities, I don't wanna go specific. I'm not gonna mention New York, Chicago, all those things. [Laughter] I don't wanna be specific.

Trump: But the one thing I noticed is dirt and filth. Everything's dirty and filthy and disgusting. And then, the crime comes and then the killing comes and then everything else. And then, we have to bail them out or they don't get bailed out and the thing goes to hell completely. But it's filthy, disgusting, dirty.

Trump: You know what? I'm a guy I hate to shake hands. I used to hate it. I had to get used to it as a politician and I think I was right. But now, you know, if you're a politician, don't shake somebody's hand. How is that for getting a vote? Guy comes up, "Sir, may I please shake your hand?" "No, I don't wanna shake your hand." "Oh, let's go out and vote for him tomorrow." [Laughter] You have to get, you have to get used, but, you know, I like cleanliness.

Trump: I'm a very clean person. And I notice that these radical left places, they turn dirty, filthy, disgusting, and then the crime follows. So we can't let that happen to our country. We just can't let it happen. So exactly one year ago tomorrow, a far left extremist assassinated my great friend and conservative voice, Charlie Kirk, because Charlie Kirk spoke the truth.

Trump: What shocked millions of American was not only the fact that Charlie was murdered as bad as it was, but also how many people made an excuse for it or cheered for it. They were cheering, some people, sick people. For a brief moment, the mask came off the radical left and you saw what they were really all, all about.

Trump: And now, those same people are trying to get power over you in this election and they are all voting Democrat, okay? They're all voting, every one of them, and you can't let it happen. We will not let them win. And in Charlie's honor, I just wanna say, "We love you, Charlie," and Erika is here someplace.

Trump: Erika? Where is Erika? [Audience chants "Charlie"]

Trump: Thank you very much. And thank you, Erika. And I think Erika is gonna be here tomorrow too. She has put up with something, boy. Oh, boy. What she's had to go through and, the most beautiful family. It's just terrible. But love, tough life, tough life. Can't let it happen. From the very beginning of this journey, I've not stopped fighting and I never will stop fighting to protect you, your family.

Trump: I had a great life before I did this. This is a little different. I had a very nice life. I didn't need to be here tonight. I could have been in a nice place somewhere in the world, but I wanna be here because I love you people. I really do. I wouldn't trade, I wouldn't trade. But the radical left communists have tried to persecute me, my loved ones and my supporters.

Trump: They attempted to put me in jail and even tried to kill me because I was doing a good job. But through it all, I have never quit. I've never backed down. I never will. And every single promise I made to you as a candidate, I've delivered on. I've delivered on everything. We've delivered on many more things than I even talked about.

Trump: Somebody said he's actually delivered, the only politician they say this about, but that I've delivered many more things than I even talked about. And all I'm asking in this election is that you stand with me, together, we will defeat communism in America. Once and for all, we're gonna defeat it and we have to defeat it badly.

Trump: And would you vote because of your great work and our tremendous economic success, as I said, we're going to give you that Trump dividend of $5,000 if we win and we're gonna win. And we'll make all Trump tax cuts permanent so that the democrats can't end them. We have them. We're not gonna let them end them.

Trump: And we'll pass the great healthcare plan. We call it the great healthcare plan to stop all government payments to the big insurance companies, which by the way, the insurance companies own the democrats. They own them. And give the money directly to the people for you to go out and buy your own healthcare.

Trump: You'll get much better healthcare and have money left over for yourselves. And we're gonna end very quickly surprise medical billing and that surprise medical billing is a tremendous, horrible situation in our country and require insurers and hospitals to post all prices clearly in plain English so you can see what you're getting into.

Trump: And we will make our most favored nation agreements on prescription drug prices permanent, which reduces your prescription drug prices by up to 90%. Think of that. You know, when I was in my first term, for 28 years there's never been a president that reduced drug prices, but I did, one eighth of 1%. And I was so proud.

Trump: I called for a news conference and I bragged to the press. So prices from January till the end of December went down one eighth of 1% and now I'm reducing them 90% more. And we'll cut out of control credit card swipe fees, saving the average family at least $1,200 per year and will not allow Americans to pay seven to eight times more for those fees than they do in any other country.

Trump: We pay seven, eight, and nine times more than they do in other, it's almost like the prescription drugs, same kind of a thing. We'll, we'll straighten it out very quickly. We will make it legally impossible for any future president to destroy our country by having the right to open the border again. We will pass a No Invasion of Our Country Act.

Trump: And we will win the war on fraud, headed up by the way, by JD Vance who's doing a great job. You know, I watched him, uh, last week and he was standing there with like 20 guys behind him, all central casting, all looked like they just got out of the greatest law schools. And I, I said, "It looks like Eliot Ness --" It's Eliot Ness in the old days.

Trump: But you know, JD's found billions and billions of dollars of fraud and he's just starting and he's really enjoying it because they're stealing from the American taxes. Thank you. Great job. And we will end no cash bail and institute the death penalty for large-scale drug dealers, human traffickers, and murderers of our law enforcement heroes.

Trump: And one way or the other, before or after, if it has to be after, I hope it's before, November 3rd election, we will pass the Save America Act. We will make mandatory photo voter ID and proof of citizenship a staple at every single election in every single state. And we will enshrine in permanent law no men in women's sports and no transgender mutilization of your children.

Trump: And again, when I'm running, we get tremendous numbers of votes, and people coming out and they vote and then they vote for the senators and the congressmen and women and all. But when I'm not running, it's a little different. So please, I ask you this as maybe more important even than the Trump dividend, please pretend that I'm running and get out and vote on November 3rd or sooner.

Trump: Because in actuality, I really am running. We don't really know it, but we are. I mean, we're running together. We have to, we have to have Congress. We have to have the majorities. If we don't have the majority, so much can be lost. It could destroy, they're so destructive, these people. They have no heart.

Trump: They're so destructive and we have to make sure they don't have a chance to destroy our country. This is one of the most important elections of your lives, only superseded by our victories in 2016, 2020, and 2024. Three great victories. And I will see you tomorrow night where I will be, where I will be closing out the first ever midterm convention.

Trump: This is incredible. And by the way, tomorrow night, I'm gonna be here tomorrow night, I'm gonna close it out, I'm gonna say good, but I'm not doing a big deal like this because I don't have to say the same stuff twice. I gave you a lot of material. I don't have to do it twice, but I'm gonna be here to say goodnight to you and I'm gonna be just sort of getting up here and saying good luck and we love you all.

Trump: That's what I'm gonna be saying tomorrow night. [Audience members respond "We love you too"]

Trump: So in 55 days, we will do what 250 years of American history absolutely demands. We will defend our nation's founding. We will protect our constitution, including our great Second Amendment, which is always under siege. [Audience members call out "Yes, sir"]

Trump: We will uphold the honor of our great heroes. We have great heroes. We will redeem the sacrifice of our ancestors. We will vanquish America's enemies. We will raise high the torch of liberty that was handed to us and march forward into a future of hope, pride, opportunity, and freedom. On November 3rd, vote Republican for House and Senate.

Trump: And with God's help, we will lead this nation to heights of glory and achievement never seen before even by our country at its best because together we will make America powerful again. We will make America wealthy again. We will make America healthy again. We will make America strong again. We will make America proud again.

Trump: We will make America safe again. And we will make America great again. [Audience states the last line simultaneously]

Trump: Thank you very much, Texas. We love you all. God bless you. God bless you all. Thank you.